ENGLISH 
BY THE NATURE METHOD 
BY 
ARTHUR M. JENSEN 
Endorsed by the Following Professors of English: 
S. R.T. O. D’ARDBNNB 
University of Li&ge 
P. N. U. HARTING 
University of Amsterdam 
FRANZ DE BACKER 
University of Ghent 
OTTO JESPERSEN (f) 
University of Copenhagen 
FRANK BEHRB 
University of Gothenburg 
B. VON LINDHEIM 
Free University of Berlin 
HELLMUT BOCK 
University of Kiel 
H. LUDEKE 
University of Basle 
C. A. BODELSEN 
University of Copenhagen 
FERNAND MOSS& (f) 
College de France 
G. BONNARD 
University of Lausanne 
OLE REUTER 
University of Helsingfors 
KARL BRUNNER 
University of Innsbruck 
K. SCHIBSBYE 
University of Copenhagen 
W. CLEMEN 
University of Munich 
F. TH. VISSER 
University of Nijmegen 
L. ECKHOFF 
University of Oslo 
MAX WILDI 
Institute of Technology, Zurich 
OTTO FUNKB 
University of Berne 
R. W. ZANDVOORT 
University of Groningen 
The Nature Method Institutes 
AMSTERDAM • BRUSSELS • COPENHAGEN • HELSINGFORS 
LONDON • MILAN • MUNICH • OSLO • PARIS 
STOCKHOLM • VIENNA • ZURICH 
PREFACES 
Extract from the Preface by 
OTTO JESPERSEN 
Ph. D., Litt. D., LL. D., Late Professor of English Language and Literature in the University of Copenhagen 
Mr. Arthur M. Jensen has asked me to write a preface to his 
course: “English by the Nature Method”. It is with great pleasure 
that I comply with his wish, for I heartily agree with his method and 
think it has been on the whole carried out very skilfully and with real 
pedagogical insight. 
The main idea is that all, or nearly all, sentences should be self¬ 
interpreting, the meaning of new words being in each case readily 
understood without any possible doubt from the context, in the begin¬ 
ning aided here and there by a simple drawing, so that a translation is 
never necessary. 
In accordance with a wise old rule the author has not been afraid 
of repeating the same thing over and over again, especially in the 
beginning, so that words and phrases are as it were hammered into 
the brains of the student so as to be his possessions for ever. 
The most necessary grammatical forms are from the very first 
imparted in a natural way without using any technical terms; later 
some very elementary grammatical instruction is given with simple 
theoretical explanations. 
It is my conviction that the student who has conscientiously worked 
his way through the course will with a minimum of effort have 
acquired a fair knowledge of the English language and will be familiar 
with the most necessary words and phrases so as to feel at home in 
the language. 
Elsinore, May the nth, 1942. 
Otto Jespersen 
1/2 
3 
PREFACES 
Preface by 
Dr. FERNAND MOSSE 
Late Professor of Languages and Literatures of Germanic Origin at the College de France 
I have pleasure in giving my fullest approval to the course entitled 
“English by the Nature Method”, which I have examined with much 
interest. It is a genuine “natural” method, most ingeniously presented 
with great pedagogical acumen. Its user can be assured of the utmost 
success, provided that he never becomes discouraged if he is working 
on his own, and that he keeps on perseveringly to the end. It is only 
by thoroughly assimilating the most judiciously chosen sentences 
making up each lesson, by learning them by heart after having studied 
and understood them, that the student will gradually discover that he 
really knows English. When he reaches the last booklet he should be 
able to express himself with facility by the help of the words, forms 
and phrases at his command. Like the man in the Gospels who was 
cured by a miracle, he can then be told to arise and walk. 
Other highly qualified persons have already excellently expressed their 
opinions of this English course. I shall merely add that, even if similar 
methods are to be found, I know of none more capable of attaining 
the desired goal than the one so patiently worked out by Mr. Arthur 
M. Jensen. 
Paris, January 1955. 
Fernand Mosse 
Preface by 
Dr. J. FOURQUET 
Professor of Germanic Philology in the University of Paris 
The method worked out by Mr. Arthur M. Jensen corresponds very 
closely to the ideal conception I had formed as I reflected on the best 
possible way of devising a rational system of modern language teaching 
inspired by the “direct method”. I had in mind a work in which the 
principles of this method would be applied down to the smallest detail. 
It would be necessary to pass from the phonetic transcription of isolated 
examples to a running transcription; to associate with pictures all 
4 
PREFACES 
words capable of being so represented, to present the material progres¬ 
sively in such a way that every new element would be explained by a 
context made up of elements already acquired, and finally systematic¬ 
ally to base the acquisition of knowledge on complete sentence forms, 
passing gradually from the simplest to the most complex types. It 
should thus be possible to build up a language without having recourse 
either to dictionary or grammar-book, those lifeless collections of 
forms divorced from their context. 
I find all these requirements complied with in Mr. Jensen’s work, 
to which I cannot but give my full approval. Moreover, the working 
out of every detail, no doubt thanks to much patience and ingenuity, 
is in every way worthy of the boldness of the plan and, if I may say 
so, of the purity of the principles inspiring the author. 
Provided one enters fully into the spirit of the method, namely 
never to make a step forward without having consolidated all that 
went before by the repetition of complete idiomatic sentences, one 
will be capable, by the end of the book, of immediate and spontaneous 
expression. It will only be necessary to make different combinations 
of the elements in the type sentence-patterns firmly imprinted 
on the nervous system, in order to speak with ease. The vocabulary, 
built up round centres of interest and always having a context, will be 
more readily recalled because of the network of associations in which 
it grew up from the start. This method can be called truly natural be¬ 
cause it takes the fullest account of the organic nature of language. 
Paris, August 1956. 
J. Fourquet 
Preface by 
Dr GEORGES BONNARD 
Professor of English Language and Literature in the University of Lausanne 
The author of “English by the Nature Method” has aimed at 
providing those who wish to learn English and are denied the help of 
an ordinary teacher, with a text-book that might, in little over a year, 
5 
PREFACES 
bring them to the point where reading English books and conversation 
in English may be, or at least begin to be, actually possible. This 
means that they must be made to acquire an intelligible pronunciation, 
the essentials of the grammar, a fairly copious vocabulary and plenty 
of idiomatic phrases. 
A careful examination of the sixty chapters — each to be mastered 
in a week — contained in the sixteen booklets of the whole course has 
convinced me that Mr. Arthur M. Jensen has really succeeded in doing 
all he had set out to do. His main concern has been with young people 
in business, which is quite natural since it is in the world of business 
that he will mostly find young men and women who feel the need of 
some knowledge of English and have never had the opportunity of 
getting it. But he has taken care not to give undue importance to their 
requirements, so that his course may be used with just as much profit 
by whoever desires to learn English by himself. On reaching the end 
of the last booklet, any student with a normal, even if untrained mind, 
will certainly be capable of reading easy stuff, of understanding some¬ 
thing of the spoken language, even of speaking it to some extent. 
This result is obtained by the systematic use of the so-called direct 
method of teaching languages. The basic principle of that method, 
as every one knows, is to teach a foreign language without the help 
of the learner's mother-tongue, except for occasional explanations. 
This can be done firstly by connecting as many words as possible 
directly with the objects, ideas, and actions they denote, and secondly 
by introducing new words, idioms, and grammatical facts in such a 
way that there can be no hesitation whatever in the pupil's mind as 
to what they mean. 
In the class-room the teacher can easily point to many objects the 
names of which he wants to teach the pupil. He may use pictures re¬ 
presenting all sorts of things which are not at hand. A number of 
verbs can also be taught by means of gestures and movements. In a 
book meant for people who try to learn a language without a teacher, 
pictures can of course be used to some advantage, but they must be 
very clear and simple, so that there will be no risk of wrong associ¬ 
ations being formed. The pictures given in the margins of the booklets 
6 
PREFACES 
answer that condition. But the author has had to rely, far more than 
any teacher in any class-room, on the second of the means at the 
disposal of the direct method, that is on the introduction of any new 
word, idiom or grammatical fact in such a context that its meaning 
can be grasped at once. 
It is in the application of that principle that “English by the Nature 
Method” is unquestionably superior to any text-book based on the 
direct method that I have ever seen. The skill with which everything 
new, be it a word, a phrase or a fact of grammar, is first presented 
is remarkable, at times even truly amazing. That skill will be best 
appreciated by those teachers who, intent on never deviating from the 
direct method, are often at a loss how to get it done. But every 
sentence seems so natural, in no way perceptibly composed for the 
purpose it fulfils, that the skill is never obvious. 
The new word must be, not only understood, but learned and remem¬ 
bered. It must become familiar. This can only be achieved by dint of 
repetition. But repetition, unless it be sustained by variety, will soon 
become wearisome. The new element must therefore be used again and 
again, each time in a different context. That is a serious difficulty. That 
difficulty has here been successfully overcome. Mr. Jensen has displayed 
a resourcefulness in the repeated use of the same element in different 
contexts which is equal to his skill in introducing it for the first time. 
And this is all the more creditable because he has done so not in discon¬ 
nected sentences — that curse of language teaching — but in continuous 
texts which, simple though they must be, quickly grow in interest. 
The course is divided into three distinct series of twenty chapters, 
each with its own general subject, and serving at the same time as a 
well-informed approach to various aspects of English civilisation, life 
and manners. Here again the author must be praised for his making 
the story he tells something more than a mere pretext for passing from 
one chapter to the next. The adventures and experiences of the clerk 
who marries his office manager's daughter are sure to delight those 
unsophisticated young people who are most likely to use “Engslish by 
the Nature Method”. 
7 
PREFACES 
One of the most interesting, and to my mind most judicious, features 
of the course is the importance it gives to the imparting of a decent 
pronunciation. The learner is expected to master the alphabet of the 
International Phonetic Association and study the simple descriptions 
of the sounds of English given in the introductory booklet before 
starting on the course proper, where, right underneath every word of 
the text, he will find its full transcription. This may appear a bit 
clumsy. But I do not see how else the problem of teaching the pronun¬ 
ciation could have been solved satisfactorily. At the cost of a slight 
initial effort, the student, however left to himself he may be, is sure 
never to go astray. And he is advised of course to use to the full every 
opportunity he may have of hearing the new sounds he must use. 
The instructions in the student’s own language which are sent to him 
with each booklet, the exercises added to all the chapters, and the para¬ 
graphs of grammar to be found in the last twenty chapters, all denote 
the same meticulous care, the same attention to the necessary details as 
have gone to the composition of the text itself. 
In conclusion I think it can be confidently asserted that those that 
set themselves to learning English with the help of Mr. Jensen’s method 
will be thoroughly satisfied with it, but on condition they do not imagine 
any language can be learnt without steady and even hard work. For 
this is not one of the least satisfactory features of “English by the 
Nature Method” that it does not pretend that you can learn to read and 
speak English in a few weeks or in a dozen lessons or so. 
May I add that in the hands of a competent teacher devoted to the 
direct method this course would probably do wonders in the class¬ 
room. 
Lausanne, February the 26th, 1951. 
Georges Bonnard 
Chapter One (1). 
The First (1st) Chapter. 
THE FAMILY 
Mr. Smith Mrs. Smith 
Mr. Smith is a man. Mrs. Smith is a woman. 
John is 
mist a smip iz a man. 
misiz smip iz a wuman. 
dyn iz 
a boy. Helen is a girl. 
The baby is also a girl. 
Helen 
a boi. helin iz a ga:l. 
da beibi iz o:lsou a ga:l. 
helin 
and the baby are girls. 
Mr. Smith is the father. Mrs. 
and da beibi a: ga:lz. 
mist a smip iz da fa: da. 
misiz 
Smith is the mother. 
John is a child. Helen is a 
smip iz da m\da. 
dyn iz a tfaild. helin iz a 
child. The baby is a child. John, Helen, and the baby 
tfaild. da beibi iz a tfaild. dyn, helin, and -da beibi 
are children. 
a: tjildran? 
is 
are 
John is a boy. 
Helen and the 
baby are girls. 
one (1) girl 
two (2) girls 
one (1) child 
two (2) children 
Helen is a girl. 
Helen and the 
baby are girls. 
9 
Chapter One (1). 
Mr. Smith is the father of John. Mr. Smith is the 
mist a smip iz da fa: da av dyn. mist a smip iz da 
father of Helen. Mr. Smith is the father of the baby. 
fa: da av helin. mist a smip iz da fa: da av da beibi. 
Mr. Smith is the father of the children. Mrs. Smith is 
mist a smip iz da fa: da av da tfildran. misiz smip iz 
the mother of John, Helen, and the baby. Mr. Smith 
da m\da av dyn, helin, and da beibi. mista smip 
and Mrs. Smith are the parents of the children. John 
and misiz smip a: da pearants av da tfildran. dyn 
is the son of Mr. and Mrs. Smith. Mr. and Mrs. Smith 
iz da SAn av mista and misiz smip. mista and misiz smip 
a 
the 
John is a boy. 
The boy is John. 
Helen and the baby 
are girls. 
The girls are 
Helen and the 
baby. 
of 
The father of the 
children. 
are the parents of John. Helen is the daughter of Mr. 
a: da pearants av dyn. helin iz da do:ta av mista 
and Mrs. Smith. Mr. and Mrs. Smith are the parents 
and misiz smip. mista and misiz smip a: da pearants 
of Helen. The baby is also the daughter of Mr. and 
av helin. da beibi iz a:lsou da da:ta av mista and 
Mrs. Smith. Mr. and Mrs. Smith are the parents of the 
misiz smip. mista and misiz smip a: da pearants av da 
baby. 
beibi. 
Mr. Smith, Mrs. Smith, John, Helen, and the baby are 
mista smip, misiz smip, dyn, helin, and da beibi a: 
a family. There are five (5) persons in the family. 
a fcemili. dear a: faiv pa:snz in da feemili. 
Mr. Smith is a person. Mrs. Smith is a person. John 
mista smip iz a pa:sn. misiz smip iz a pa:sn. dyn 
10 
The First (1st) Chapter, 
is a person. Helen is a person, and the baby is also 
iz d pa.sn. helin iz 3 pa:sn, and d 3 beibi iz o:lsou 
a person. 
3 p3:sn. 
How many persons are there in the family? There are 
hau meni p3:snz a: dea in d3 fcemili? de37 a: 
five (5) persons in the family. Who are the five (5) 
faiv pa:snz in d 3 fcemili. hu: a: da faiv 
persons in the family? They are the father, the mother, 
pd'.snz in d3 fcemili? dei a: da fa:d3, d3 mAda, 
the son, the daughter, and the baby daughter. How 
d3 SAn, 63 da:ta, snd d3 beibi do:ta . hau 
many children are there in the family? There are 
meni tfildran a: dea in d 3 fcemili? deer a: 
three (3) children in the family. Who are the three (3) 
pri: tjildran in d3 fcemili. hu: a: d3 pri: 
children in the family? They are the son, the daughter, 
tfildran in d3 fcemili? dei a: da SAn, d3 da.ta, 
and the baby daughter. How many girls are there in 
3nd da beibi da:ta. hau meni ga:lz a: dea in 
the family? There are two (2) girls in the family. 
da fcemili? dear a: tu: ga:lz in da fcemili. 
Who are the two (2) girls in the family? They are the 
hu: a: da tu: ga:lz in da fcemili? dei a: da 
daughter and the baby daughter. How many boys are 
da:ta and da beibi da:ta . hau meni boiz a: 
there in the family? There is one (1) boy in the family. 
dea in da fcemili? dear iz WAn boi in da fcemili. 
how many? 
How many girls 
are there in the 
family? 
there is 
there are 
There Is one boy 
in the family. 
There are two 
girls in the family. 
11 
Chapter One (1). 
who? 
he 
she 
they 
Who is John? 
He is the son. 
Who is Helen? 
She is the 
daughter. 
Who are Helen 
and the baby? 
They are the 
daughters. 
Who is the boy? The boy is John; he is the son of 
hu: iz dd boif dd bai iz dyn; hi: iz da s\n av 
Mr. Smith. The girl is Helen; she is the daughter of 
mist a smip. da ga:l iz helin; fi: iz da da:ta av 
Mr. Smith. The man is Mr. Smith; he is the father. 
mist a smip. da man iz mist a smip; hi: iz da fa: da. 
The woman is Mrs. Smith; she is the mother. The 
da wuman iz misiz smip; fi: iz da mxda. da 
man and the woman are Mr. and Mrs. Smith; they are 
man and da wuman a: mista and misiz smip; dei a: 
the parents. 
da pearants. 
John is the brother of Helen. Helen is the sister of 
dyn iz da brAda av helin. helin iz da sista av 
man 
woman 
boy 
girl 
baby 
\ persons 
SSSr }■»“"•* 
boy | 
girl >children 
baby J 
John. The baby is the sister of John and Helen. The 
dyn. da beibi iz da sista av dyn and helin. da 
baby and Helen are sisters. John and Helen are 
beibi and helin a: sistaz. dyn and helin a: 
brother and sister. 
brAda and sista. 
Mr. Smith is the husband of Mrs. Smith. Mrs. Smith 
mista smip iz da liAzband av misiz smip. misiz smip 
is the wife of Mr. Smith. Who is Mr. Smith? He is the 
iz da waif av mista smip. hu: iz mista smip f hi: iz da 
husband of Mrs. Smith and the father of the three (3) 
hxzhand av misiz smip and da fa:da av da pri: 
children. Who is Mrs. Smith? She is the wife of Mr. 
tfildran hu: iz misiz smip? fi: iz da waif av mista 
12 
The First (1st) Chapter. 
Smith and the mother of the three (3) children. The 
smip and da m\da av da pri: tjildran. da 
three (3) children are the son, the daughter, and the 
pri: tjildran a: da s\n, da da:ta, and da 
baby daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Smith. The father, the 
beibi do:ta av mista and ntisiz smip. da fa:da, da 
mother, the son, the daughter, and the baby daughter 
niAda, da s.ui, da dj:ta, and da beibi da:ta 
are a family of five (5) persons. 
a: a fee mill av faiv pa:snz. 
EXERCISE A (eksasaiz ei). 
WORDS (wa:dz): 
Mr. Smith is a —. Mrs. Smith is a —. John is a —. 
Helen is a —. Helen and the baby are —. John is a —, 
and Helen and the baby are also —. There — one boy 
in the family. There — two girls in the family. There 
— one father in the family. There — three children in 
the family. John — the son. Mrs. Smith — the mother. 
Mr. and Mrs. Smith — the parents. John, Helen, and 
the baby — the children. Mr. Smith is — father of 
John. Helen is the daughter — Mr. Smith. John, Helen, 
and the baby are — children — Mr. Smith. 
The man is — Smith; he — the father. The boy is 
John; — is the son. The woman is — Smith; — is the 
mother. The girls are Helen and the baby; — are the 
daughters. John is the — of Helen. Helen is the — 
of John. John and Helen are — and —. Mr. Smith 
man 
woman 
Mr. 
Mrs. 
boy 
girl 
baby 
person 
child 
children 
father 
mother 
son 
daughter 
sister 
brother 
13 
Chapter One (1). 
parents 
family 
wife 
husband 
one 
two 
three 
a 
the 
is 
are 
of 
there 
he 
she 
they 
and 
also 
five 
in 
how many? 
who? 
exercise 
word 
is the — of Mrs. Smith. Mrs. Smith is the — of Mr. 
Smith. 
There are five — in the family. The five — in the 
family are the —, the —, the —, the —, and the —. 
— boy is John;-the son. — man is Mr. Smith; 
he is the —. — woman is Mrs. Smith; she is the —. 
— girls are Helen and the baby; they are the —. — 
father and — mother are Mr. and Mrs. Smith; they are 
— parents of the children. 
— is Mr. Smith? He is the father-children. 
— many children are there in the family? There are — 
children in the family. How — boys are there in the 
family? There is — boy in the family.-girls 
are there in the family? There are — girls in the 
family. — are the three children in the family? 
The — children are John,* Helen, and the baby. — is 
the son? The — is John. — are the daughters? — 
daughters — Helen and the baby.-persons — 
there in the family? There — five — in the family. 
— are the — persons in — family? — are — father, — 
mother, — son, and — two daughters. 
EXERCISE B (eksdsais bi:). 
Who is the man?-. Who is the woman? 
-. Who is the boy?-. Who are 
the two girls?-. Who are the 
parents of John, Helen, and the baby?-, —, 
-- How many persons are there in 
14 
The First (1st) Chapter. 
the family?-. Who are the five 
persons?-,-, <-,-,-. 
How many children are there in the family?- 
-. Who are they?-, —,-. 
How many girls are there in the family?- 
-. Who are they?-. How 
many boys are there in the family?-. 
Who is Helen?-. Who is Mrs. 
Smith?--. Who is Mr. Smith? 
15 
Chapter Two (2). 
The Second (2nd) Chapter. 
is 
are 
February Is a 
month. 
There are twelve 
months. 
one - first 
two -second 
three - third 
four - fourth 
five - fifth 
six - sixth 
seven - seventh 
eight - eighth 
nine - ninth 
ten - tenth 
eleven - eleventh 
twelve - twelfth 
thirteen - thir¬ 
teenth 
fourteen - four¬ 
teenth 
THE YEAR 
January is a month. February is also a month. There 
dyenjuari iz 3 mAnp. febrnari iz o:lsou d mAnp. dear 
are twelve (12) months, one (1), two (2), three (3), 
a: twelv mAnps, w\n, tu:, pri:, 
four (4), five (5), six (6), seven (7), eight (8), nine (9), 
fa:, faiv, siks, sevn, eit, nain, 
ten (10), eleven (11), twelve (12). 
ten, i'levn, twelv. 
January is the first (1st) month. February is the 
d^cenjuariiz da fd:st mAnp. febrnari iz da 
second (2nd) month. March is the third (3rd) month. 
sekand mAnp. ma:tf iz da pa:d mAnp. 
April is the fourth (4th) month. May is the fifth (5th) 
eipril iz da fa:p mAnp. mci iz da fifp 
month. June is the sixth (6th) month. July is the 
mAnp. dyt:n iz da siksp m.\np. dyt'lai iz da 
seventh (7th) month. August is the eighth (8th) month. 
sevnp mAnp. a:gast iz di. dtp mAnp. 
September is the ninth (9th) month. October is the 
sap'temba iz da nainp mAnp. jk'tonba iz da 
tenth (10th) month. November is the eleventh (11th) 
tenp niAiip. nou'vemba iz di i'levnp 
month. December is the twelfth (12th) month. 
mAnp. di'semba iz da twelfp mAnp . 
16 
The Second (2nd) Chapter 
January and February are months. There are twelve 
d^cenjuari dnd februari a: wiah ps. dear a: twelv 
months in a year. January is the first month of the 
mAnps in a jia. d^cenjuari iz da fa:st niAnp av da 
year. December is the last month of the year. A year 
jia. di'semba iz da la:st mAnp av da jia. a jia 
has twelve months. A month has four weeks. Three 
hcez twelv mAnps. a mAnp hcez fa: wi:ks. pri: 
months have thirteen (13) weeks. A week has seven 
mAnps hcev pa:ti:n wi:ks. a wi:k hcez sevn 
days. Two weeks have fourteen (14) days. 
deiz. tu: zvi:ks hcev fa:ti:n deiz. 
How many months are there in a year? There are 
hau meni mAnps a: dea in a jia? dear a: 
twelve months in a year. How many weeks are there 
twelv mAnps in a jia. hau meni wi:ks a: dea 
in a month? There are four weeks in a month. How 
in a niAnp? dear a: fa: wi:ks in a mAnp. hau 
many days are there in a week? There are seven days 
meni deiz a: dea in a wi:k? dear a: sevn deiz 
in a week. What are the seven days of the week? 
in a wi:k. hwat a: da sevn deiz av da wi:k? 
The seven days of the week are: Sunday, Monday, 
da sevn deiz av da wi:k a: : SAndi, niAndi, 
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday. 
tju:zdi, wenzdi, pai.zdi, fraidi, scetadi. 
has 
have 
One week has 
seven days. 
Two weeks have 
fourteen days. 
What month is the first month of the year? January is 
hwat mAnp iz da fa:st mAnp av da jia? d^cenjuari iz 
17 
Chapter Two (2). 
what? 
which of? 
What is the first 
month of the 
year? 
Which of the 
months of the year 
is the first? 
the first month of the year. What is the last month of 
dd fd:st mAnp dv dd jid. hwot iz dd la:st mAnp dv 
the year? December is the last month of the year. 
dd jia? di'sembd iz dd la:st mAnp dv dd jid. 
What is the first day of the week? Sunday is the 
hwdt iz dd fd:st dei dv dd wi:k? SAndi iz dd 
first day of the week. What is the last day of the 
fd:st dei dv dd wi:k. hwot iz dd la:st dei dv dd 
week? Saturday is the last day of the week. 
wi:kf scetddi iz dd la:st dei dv dd w\:k. 
Which of the days of the week is the first? Sunday is 
hwitj dv dd deiz dv dd wi:k iz dd fd'.stf SAndi iz 
the first day of the week. Which of the days of the 
dd fd:st dei dv dd wi:k. hwitf dv dd deiz dv dd 
week is the second (2nd) ? Monday is the second (2nd) day 
wi:k iz dd sekdndf mAndi iz dd sekdnd dei 
of the week. Tuesday is the third (3rd) day of the week. 
dv dd wi:k. tju.zdi iz dd pd:d dei dv dd wi:k. 
Wednesday is the fourth (4th) day of the week. Thurs- 
wenzdi iz dd fo:p dei dv dd wi:k. pd:z- 
day is the fifth (5th) day of the week. Friday is the 
di iz dd fifp dei dv dd wi:k. fraidi iz dd 
sixth (6th) day of the week. Saturday is the seventh (7th) 
siksp dei dv dd wi:k. scetddi iz dd sevnp 
day of the week. Saturday is also the last day of the 
dei dv dd wi:k. scetddi iz d'.lsou dd la.st dei dv dd 
week. Which of the months of the year is the 
wi:k. huntj dv dd mAnps dv dd jid iz dd 
18 
The Second (2nd) Chapter. 
twelfth (12th)? December is the twelfth (12th) and 
twelfpf di'semba iz da twelfp and 
also the last month of the year. What is the ninth (9th) 
a:lsou da la:st mAnp av da jia. hwot iz da nainp 
month of the year? September is the ninth (9th) month. 
mAnp av da jia? sap'temba iz da nainp mAnp . 
What day is the eighth (8th) day of the week? There is 
hwot dei iz di eitp dei av da wi:k? dear iz 
no eighth (8th) day of the week. There are only 
nou eitp dei av da wi:k . dear a: ounli 
seven (7) days in a week. Which of the months of the 
sevn deiz in a wi:k . hwitf av da mAnps av da 
year is the thirteenth (13th)? There is no thirteenth 
jia iz da pa:ti:np? dear iz nou pa:ti:np 
month of the year. There are only twelve months in 
mAnp av da jia . dear a: ounli twelv mAnps in 
a year. 
a jia . 
EXERCISE A. 
January is a —. March and April are —. — is the 
first month of the year. February is the — month of 
the year. March is the — month. April is the — 
month. May is the — month. June is the — month. 
July is the — month. August is the — month. Sep¬ 
tember is the — month. October is the — month. 
November is the — month. December is the — and 
also the — month of the year. 
no 
There is no eighth 
day of the week. 
WORDS: 
four 
six 
seven 
eight 
nine 
ten 
eleven 
twelve 
thirteen 
fourteen 
first 
second 
19 
Chapter Two (2). 
third 
fourth 
fifth 
sixth 
seventh 
eighth 
ninth 
tenth 
eleventh 
twelfth 
thirteenth 
fourteenth 
month 
year 
week 
day 
January 
February 
March 
April 
May 
June 
July 
August 
September 
October 
November 
December 
Sunday 
Monday 
Tuesday 
Wednesday 
Thursday 
Friday 
Saturday 
last 
A — has twelve months. A — has seven days. Two 
-fourteen days. The seven days of the week 
are: —, —, —, —, —, —, —. There is — eighth day 
of the week. There is — thirteenth month; a year 
has — twelve months. The twelve months of the year 
are: —, —, —, —, —, —, —, —, —, —, —, —. Sunday 
is the — day of the week. Saturday is the-of 
the week. 
How — days are there in a week? There are — days 
— a week. — many weeks has a month? A month 
has — weeks. — many weeks — three months? 
Three months-weeks.-months has a year? 
A year-months. — is the first month of the 
year? — is the first month of the year. — is the 
fourth day of the week? The fourth day of the 
week is —. — is the last month of the year? The 
last month of the year is —. — of the months of the 
year is the thirteenth? There is — thirteenth month; 
there are — twelve months — a year. 
EXERCISE B. 
How many months are there in a year?- 
-. How many days has a week?-. 
How many days have two weeks?-. How 
many weeks are there in a month?-. 
Which of the months of the year is the first?- 
-. What is the second month?- 
-. What is the third month?-. What 
is the fifth day of the week? 
20 
The Second (2nd) Chapter. 
Which of the days of the week is the eighth?- 
-. What is the twelfth month of the year? 
-. Which of the days of the week 
is the last?-. What is the thir¬ 
teenth month of the year?-. How 
many weeks have three months?-. 
has 
have 
what? 
which of? 
no 
only 
21 
Chapter Three (3). 
The Third (3rd) Chapter. 
what? 
it 
they 
What is the name 
of the boy? 
It is' John. 
What are 
the names of the 
girls? 
They are Helen 
and Alice. 
NAMES 
The name of the boy is John. The name of the girl 
da neim av da boi iz dyn. da neim av da ga:l 
is Helen. The name of the father is Mr. Smith. 
iz helin. da neim av da fa: da iz mist a smip. 
The name of the mother is Mrs. Smith. What is the 
da neim av da m\da iz misiz smip. hwot iz da 
name of the girl? It is Helen. 
neim av da ga:l? it iz helin. 
What is the name 
hwot iz da neim 
of the baby girl? It is Alice. 
av da beibi ga:l? it iz celis. 
What is the name 
hwat iz da neim 
of the boy? It is John. What are the names of the 
av da boi? it iz dyn. hwot a: da neimz av da 
parents? They are Mr. and Mrs. Smith. What is the 
pearants? del a: mista and misiz smip. hwot iz da 
name of the family? It is Smith. Mr. Smith has a wife. 
neim av da fcemili? it iz smip. mista smip hcez a waif. 
Her name is Mrs. Smith. Mr. Smith has a daughter. 
ha: neim iz misiz smip. mista smip hcez a do:ta. 
Her name is Helen. Mr. Smith has a son. His name 
ha: neim iz helin. mista smip hcez a SAn. hiz neim 
is John. 
iz dyn. 
Has Mr. Smith a wife? Yes, he has a wife. What 
hcez mista smip a waif? jes, hi: hcez a waif. hwot 
22 
The Third (3rd) Chapter. 
is the name of his wife? Her name is Mrs. Smith. 
iz be neim ev hiz waif ? he: neim iz misiz smip. 
Has Mr. Smith a son? Yes, he has a son. What 
hcez miste smip $ s\n? jes, hi: hcez 9 SAn. hwot 
is the name of his son? His name is John. Mr. 
iz bd neim ev hiz sau? hiz neim iz dyn. mistd 
Smith has a son and two daughters. What are the 
smip hcez 9 SAn 9nd tu: do:tez. hwot a: be 
names of the three children? Their names are John, 
neimz ev be pri: tfildren? bee neimz a: dyn, 
Helen, and Alice. 
helin, end alis. 
John is twelve years old. How old is John? He is 
dyn iz twelv jiez ould. hau ould iz dynf hi: iz 
twelve years old. Helen is ten years old. How old is 
twelv jiez ould. helin iz ten jiez ould. hau ould iz 
Helen? She is ten years old. The baby is six months 
helin? ji: iz ten jiez ould. be beibi iz siks mAnps 
old. How old is the baby? She is six months old. 
ould. hau ould iz be beibi? fi: iz siks mAnps ould. 
John is twelve years old, and Helen is ten years 
dyn iz twelv jiez ould, end helin iz ten jiez 
old. John is two years older than Helen. Is John 
ould. dyn iz tu: jiez oulde been helin. iz dyn 
fourteen (14) years old? No, he is not fourteen 
fo:ti:n jiez ould? nou, hi: iz not fo:ti:n 
years old; he is only twelve years old. Is Helen 
jiez ould; hi: iz ounli twelv jiez ould. iz helin 
his 
her 
their 
The name of the 
husband is Mr. 
Smith. His name 
is Mr. Smith. 
The name of the 
wife is Mrs. 
Smith. Her name 
is Mrs. Smith. 
The names of the 
children are John, 
Helen, and Alice. 
Their names are 
John, Helen, and 
Alice. 
23 
Chapter Three (3). 
thirteen (13) years old? No, she is not thirteen 
pa:ti:n jias ould? nou, fi: is not pd:ti:n 
years old; she is only ten years old. Is Helen 
jidz ould; fi: is ounli ten jias ould. is helin 
older than John? No, she is not older than John; 
oulda dcen dyn? nou, fi: is not oulda dcen dyn; 
John is two years older than she is. 
dyn is tu: jias oulda dcen fi: is. 
John is not fourteen, but only twelve years old. Helen 
dyn is not fo:ti:n, b\t ounli twelv jias ould. helin 
is not thirteen, but only ten years old. John is not a girl, 
is not pa:ti.n, bAt ounli ten jias ould. dyn is not a ga:l, 
but Helen is a girl. Helen is not a boy, but John is a 
bAt helin is a ga:l . helin is not a boi, b\t dyn is a 
boy. The baby is not old; she is young. She is only six 
boi. da beibi is not ould; fi: is jAtj. fi: is ounli siks 
months old. Mr. Smith is a young man; he is thirty-six 
mAnps ould. mista smip is a jAtj mcen; hi: is pa:ti'siks 
(36) years old. Mrs. Smith is a young woman; she is 
jias ould. misis smip is a jAtj wuman; fi: is 
thirty-two (32) years old. Mr. Smith has a father. The 
pa:ti'tu: jias ould. mista smip hces a fa:da. do 
father of Mr. Smith is not young; he is old. He is 
fa:da av mista smip is not jAtj; hi: is ould. hi: is 
sixty-two (62) years old. John, Helen, and the baby 
siksti'tu: jias ould. dyn, helin, and da beibi 
are young; they are children. 
a: jAtj; dei a: tfildran. 
24 
The Third (3rd) Chapter. 
Mr. and Mrs. Smith are also young, but they are older 
mistd and misiz smip a: o:lsou jAy, b\t dei a: oulda 
than the children. The children are younger than their 
Seen da tfildran. da tfildran a: jAyga deen dea 
parents. Is John younger than Helen? No, he is not 
pear ants. iz dyn jAyga deen helinf nou, hi: iz not 
younger than Helen; he is two years older than Helen. 
jAyga deen helin; hi: iz tu: jiaz oulda deen helin. 
Is the baby younger than Helen? Yes, she is the 
iz da beibi JAyga deen helin? jes, ji: iz da 
youngest of the children. Which of the persons in the 
j Ay gist av da tfildran. hwitj av da pa:snz in da 
family is the oldest? The father of Mr. Smith is the 
feemili iz di ouldist? da fa: da av mist a smip iz di 
oldest. Which of the three children is the youngest? 
ouldist. hwitf av da pri: tfildran iz da JAygist? 
The baby is the youngest. 
da beibi iz da jAygist. 
Has John three sisters? No, he has only two sisters, 
heez dpn pri: sistaz? nou, hi: heez ounli tu: sistaz, 
not three. Have Mr. and Mrs. Smith four children? 
not pri:. heev mista and misiz smip fo: tfildran? 
No, they have not four children, but only three. Have 
nou, dei hcev not fo: tfildran, bAt ounli pri:. heev 
Mr. and Mrs. Smith two sons? No, they have only one 
mista and misiz smip tu: SAnz? nou, dei heev ounli wau 
son, but two daughters. 
sau, bAt tu: do:taz. 
young 
younger 
youngest 
Helen is young. 
She is younger 
than John. 
The baby is the 
youngest of the 
three children. 
old 
older 
oldest 
How old is John? 
John is older than 
Helen. 
The father of Mr. 
Smith is the oldest 
person in the 
family. 
has 
have 
John has two 
sisters. 
Mr. and Mrs. 
Smith have three 
children. 
25 
Chapter Three (3). 
What is the name of the family? The name of the 
hwat iz da neim dv da fcemili? da neim av da 
family is Smith. What is Helen? Helen is a girl. 
fcemili iz smip. hwat iz helin? helin iz a ga:l. 
Which of the children is the boy? John is the boy. 
hwitf av da tjildran iz da baif d$an iz da bai. 
What day is it? It is Sunday. What is the first day 
hwat dei iz it? it iz SAtidi. hwat iz da fa:st dei 
of the week? Sunday is the first day of the week. 
av da wi:kf s\ndi iz da fa:st dei av da wi:k. 
What is the name of the first month? The name of 
hwat iz da neim av da fa:st mAnpf da neim av 
the first month is January. Which of the months is 
da fa:st mAnp iz d^cenjuari. hwitf av da mAnps iz 
the second? February is the second month. 
da sekandf februari iz da sekand mAnp . 
EXERCISE A. 
The — of the boy is John. The — of the father is — 
Smith. The-the mother is — Smith. Mr. Smith 
has a wife; — name is Mrs. Smith. Mr. Smith has a 
daughter; — name is Helen. Mr. Smith has a son; — 
name is John. John has a sister; the name of — sister 
is Helen. Mr. and Mrs. Smith have three children; — 
names are John, Helen, and Alice. Mr. and Mrs. Smith 
have two daughters; — names are Helen and Alice. 
Helen is ten years —. Mr. Smith is thirty-six years —. 
John is two years — than Helen. Helen is nine years 
and six months — than the baby. 
26 
The Third (3rd) Chapter. 
The father of Mr. Smith is the — person in the family. 
Mr. Smith is older — Mrs. Smith. Helen is older — 
the baby. John is not fourteen — old; he is only twelve 
years old. Helen is — thirteen years old; she is — ten 
years old. Mr. Smith is — old, but young. Mrs. Smith 
is not a man, — a woman. John is — a girl, — Helen* is 
a girl. John — two sisters. Helen and the baby — one 
brother. The children — two parents. Mr. and Mrs. 
Smith — three children. They — only one son, but 
they — two daughters. Mr. Smith — a wife. Helen — 
a baby sister. The baby — a brother and a sister. 
— is the name of the girl? — is Helen. — is the 
name of the youngest child? — is Alice. — of the 
children is the youngest?-is the youngest.-the 
persons in the family is the oldest? The father of Mr. 
Smith is the —. — are the names of the parents? The 
names of the parents — Mr. and Mrs. Smith. — of the 
persons in the family is the youngest? The baby is the 
-the family. —day is it? It is—. —is the last day 
of the week? — is the last day of the week. — John a 
girl? —, he is-. Is Helen — than the baby? Yes, 
she is-the baby. Is the baby-of the children? 
—, she is — six months —. — Mr. Smith the husband 
of Mrs. Smith? —, he is-of Mrs. Smith. 
EXERCISE B. 
What is the name of the baby girl?-. 
Which of the children is the boy?-. What 
day is it?-. What is the first day of the 
week?-. What is the name of 
WORDS: 
name 
what? 
it 
27 
Chapter Three (3). 
yes 
no 
his 
her 
their 
old 
young 
than 
not 
but 
thirty-two 
thirty-six 
sixty-two 
the family?-. Which of the persons 
in the family is the oldest?-. Which 
of the children is the youngest?-. 
How old is she?-. How old is Mr. Smith? 
-. How old is Helen?-. How 
many years is John older than Helen?-. 
Is Helen older than the baby? —,-. 
Is Mrs. Smith older than Mr. Smith? —,- 
-. Is John old? —,-. Is the father of 
Mr. Smith old? —,-. Are the children young? 
—,-. Are the parents old? —,-. Has 
John three sisters? —,-. Have the parents 
three children? —,-. Have the girls a 
brother? —,-. Are John and Helen brother 
and sister? —,-. Have they a sister? —, — 
-. Have Mr. and Mrs. Smith two sons? —, — 
-. What is his name?-. Which 
of the children is ten years old?-. 
28 
Chapter Four (4). 
The Fourth (4th) Chapter. 
COUNTRIES AND CITIES 
Mr. and Mrs. Smith and their three children live in 
mist a end misiz smip and dea pri: tfildrdn liv in 
England. They live in a house. Has their house a 
iygland. dei liv in a haus. hcez dea haus a 
window? Yes, their house has many windows. How 
windou? jes, dea haus hcez meni windouz. hau 
many windows has their house? It has eight windows. 
meni windouz hcez dea haus? it hcez eit windouz. 
Has their house a door? Yes, it has two doors. It 
hcez dea haus a da:? jes, it hcez tu: da:z. it 
has also a roof. The roof is the top of the house. 
hcez a:lsou a ru:f. da ru:f iz da tap av da haus. 
What is the top of the house? The top of the house 
hwat iz da tap av da haus? da tap av da haus 
is the roof. The house has four walls. Has the 
iz da ru:f. da haus hcez fa: wa:lz. hcez da 
house a fifth wall? No, it has only four walls. The 
haus a fifp wa:l? nou, it hcez ounli fa: wa:lz. da 
windows and the doors are in the walls. 
windouz and da da:z a: in da wa.lz. 
Where is London? London is in England. Where is 
hwear iz lAndan? I And an iz in iy gland. hwear iz 
Paris? Paris is in France. Where is Stockholm? 
pceris? pceris iz in fra:ns. hwear iz stakhoum? 
29 
Chapter Four (4). 
Stockholm is in Sweden. Where is Berlin? Berlin is 
st ok lion w iz in swi.'dn. hive dr iz bai'lin? ba:'lin iz 
in Germany. Where is Copenhagen? Copenhagen is 
in dy.mani. hwear iz koupriheigan? koupn'heigan iz 
in Denmark. Where is Oslo? Oslo is in Norway. 
in dennm:k. hwear iz azlont azlou iz in na:wei. 
Where is Moscow? Moscow is in Russia. Where is 
hwear iz mask on? maskou iz in rAfa. Invear iz 
one girl 
two girls 
one boy 
two boys 
one city 
two cities 
one country 
two countries 
Helsinki (Helsingfors)? Helsinki is in Finland. Eng- 
helsiyki (helsiyfa:z)f helsiyki iz in f inland. in¬ 
land is a country. Russia is a country. England and 
gland iz a kAtitri. r\ja iz a kAtitri. itjgland and 
Russia are two countries. 
r\ja a: tu: kxntriz. , 
Mr. and Mrs. Smith and their children live in London. 
mista and misiz smip and dea tjildran liv in Lxndan. 
London is a city. Copenhagen is also a city. London 
Ixndan iz a siti . koupn'heigan iz a:Ison a siti. lxndan 
Baby = the baby 
Helen and Baby 
are sisters. 
Helen and the baby 
are sisters. 
as - as 
(not) so - as 
Mr. Smith is 
as big as his 
father. 
Baby is not so 
big as Helen. 
and Copenhagen are two cities. There are many 
and koupn'heigan a: tu: sitiz. dear a: mcni 
houses in London. London is a big city. There are 
hauziz in l And an. I And an iz a big siti. dear a: 
also many houses in Copenhagen. Copenhagen is also 
a:lsou meni hauziz in koupn'heigan. koupn'heigan iz a.lsou 
a big city, but Copenhagen is not so big a city as London. 
a big siti, b.xt koupn'heigan iz nat sou big a siti ccz l And an. 
Helen is a big girl, but she is not so big as John. Is 
hclin iz a big ga:l, bxt ji: iz nat sou big ccz d$an. iz 
30 
The Fourth (4th) Chapter. 
Baby as big as Helen? No, Baby is not so big as Helen; 
beibi cez big cez helin? nou, beibi iz rut sou big cez helin; 
she is only a small girl. Is John as big as his father? 
ji: iz ounli a sma:l ga:l. iz dyn cez big cez hiz fa:da? 
No, John is not so big as his father. Is Helen as big 
nou, dyn iz rut sou big cez hiz fa:da. iz helin cez big 
as her mother? No, Helen is not so big as her mother. 
cez ha: ntAdaf nou, helin iz rut sou big cez ha: mAda. 
John is bigger than Helen, and Mrs. Smith is bigger 
dyn iz big a dcen helin, and misiz smip iz big a 
than John. Which is the biggest of the three children? 
dcen dyn. hwitf iz da bigist av da pri: tfildranf 
John is the biggest. Which is the biggest of the cities 
dyn iz da bigist. hwitf iz da bigist av da sitiz 
in Europe? London is the biggest city in Europe. 
in juarap? Undan iz da bigist siti in juarap. 
England is a country in Europe. London is the biggest 
iygland iz a kAntri in jtlarap. I And an iz da bigist 
city in England. Sweden is a country in Europe. Stock- 
siti in iygland. swi:dn iz a kAntri in juarap. stak- 
holm is the biggest city in Sweden. 
hourn iz da bigist siti in swi:dn. 
Mr. Smith is English. He lives in England. Mrs. Smith 
rnista smip iz iyglif. hi: livz in iygland. misiz smip 
is English. She lives in England. Their children are 
iz iyglif . fi: livz in iygland. dea tfildran a: 
English. They live in England. The English live in 
iyglif. dei liv in iygland. di iyglif liv in 
big 
bigger 
biggest 
Helen is a big girl. 
John is bigger 
than Helen. 
John is the biggest 
of the children. 
which ... of? 
= which of? 
Which is the 
biggest of the 
three children? 
= Which of the 
three children is 
the biggest? 
31 
Chapter Four (4). 
lives 
live 
John lives in a 
house. 
John and Helen 
live in a house. 
England. The Danes live in Denmark. The Finlanders 
iy gland. da deins liv in denma:k. da finlandas 
live in Finland. The Russians live in Russia. The 
liv in f inland. da rAfans liv in rAfa. da 
Swedes live in Sweden. The Norwegians live in Norway. 
swi'.dz liv in swi:dn. da no:'wi:dyns liv in no.wei. 
The Germans live in Germany. The French live in 
da dy.mans liv in dy.mani. da frenf liv in 
France. 
fra: ns. 
England is bigger than Denmark, but it is not so big as 
iy gland is big a dcen denma:k, bAt it is not sou big cos 
France. Norway is bigger than Denmark, but it is not 
fra: ns. no:wei is big a dcen denma:k, bAt it is not 
so big as Sweden. The house of Mr. and Mrs. Smith 
sou big ces swi:dn. da haus av mista and misis smip 
is not a big house; it is a small house. Baby is not a 
is not a big haus; it is a smo:l haus. beibi is not a 
big girl; she is only a small girl. Helen is smaller than 
big ga:l; fi: is ounli a smo:l ga:l. helin is smo:la dcen 
John, and John is smaller than his father. Helen is 
dyn, and dyn is sma:la dcen his fa:da. helin is 
smaller than her mother. There are many houses in 
situ:la dcen ha: niAda. dear a: meni hausis in 
a big city. There are many big cities in a big country. 
a big siti. dear a: meni big sitis in a big kAntri. 
32 
Denmark is not a big country; it is only a small country. 
dcnma:k is not a big kAntri ; it is ounli a sma:l kAntri. 
The Fourth (4th) Chapter. 
There are not many big cities in Denmark. 
dear a: not meni big sitiz in denma:k. 
Mr. Smith is a man; his father is also a man. Mr. 
mista smip iz a man; hiz fa:da iz o:\sou a mcen . mista 
Smith and his father are two men. Mrs. Smith is a 
smip and hiz fa:da a: tu: men. misiz smip iz a 
woman; her sister is also a woman. Mrs. Smith and her 
wuman; ha: sista iz o:lsou a wuman. misiz smip and ha: 
sister are two women. Boys and girls are children. 
sista a: tu: wimin. boiz and ga:lz a: tjildran. 
Men, women, and children are people (persons). There 
men, wimin, and tjildran a: pi:pi (pa:snz). dear 
are many people in England. How many people are 
a: meni pi: pi in ifjgland. hau meni pi: pi a: 
there in England? There are forty-five (45) million people 
dea in ifjglandt dear a: fo:tifaiv miljan pi:pl 
in England. How many people are there in Finland? 
in ifjgland. hau meni pi:pl a: dea in f inland f 
There are more than three million people in Finland. 
dear a: mo: dan pri: mil j an pi:pl in f inland. 
There are more people in England than in Denmark. 
dear a: mo: pi: pi in iy gland dan in denma:k. 
There are not so many people in Denmark as in Sweden. 
dear a: not sou meni pi:pl in denma:k az in swi:dn. 
There are six million people in Sweden. There are 
dear a: siks miljan pi: pi in swi:dn. dear a: 
more Swedes than Danes. 
mo: swi:dz dan deinz. 
one man [man] 
two men [men] 
one woman 
[wuman] 
two women 
[wimin] 
33 
Chapter Four (4). 
What people live in England? The English live in 
hwat pi: pi liv in iy gland? di iyglif liv in 
England. What people live in France? The French 
iygland. hwat pi: pi liv in fra:nsf da. frenf 
live in France. What people live in Russia? The 
liv in fra.ns. hunt pi:pl liv in r\jaf da 
Russians live in Russia. 
rAfanz liv in r\ja. 
Mr. and Mrs. Smith have a son. Have they more than 
mist a and misiz smip hcev a sau. hcev dei ma: dean 
one child? Yes, they have three children. They have 
wah tfaild? jes, dei hcev pri: tjildran. dei hcev 
two girls, but only one boy. They have more girls than 
tu: ga:lz, bAt ounliwAn bai. dei hcev ma: ga:lz deen 
boys. Has John more than two sisters? No, he has 
baiz. hcez d$an ma: deen tu: sistazf non , hi: hcez 
only two sisters. Are there more than four persons in 
ounli tu: sistaz. a: dea ma: deen fa: pa:snz in 
the family? Yes, there are five persons in the family. 
da fcemilif jes, dear a: faiv pa:snz in da feemili. 
What more persons are there in the family than the 
hwat ma: pa:snz a: dea in da feemili deen da 
father and the mother? There are the three children. 
fa:da and da niAdat dear a: da pri: tfildran . 
EXERCISE A. 
Mr. and Mrs. Smith and their three children — in Eng¬ 
land. They — in a house. Mr. Smith — in England. 
34 
The Fourth (4th) Chapter. 
The — of Mr. and Mrs. Smith has eight windows. The 
— of the house are in the walls. The — has two doors. 
The two — of the house are in the —. The house has 
four —. The windows and the doors are in the —. The 
— is the top of the house. The — of the house is the 
roof. 
England is a —. Sweden is also a —. London is a —. 
Stockholm is also a —. London and Stockholm are 
two —. There are many — in London. London has 
— houses. Denmark is a country in —. Russia is also 
a country in —. Mr. Smith and his father are two —. 
Mrs. Smith and her sister are two —. The mother of 
Mrs. Smith is also a —. London is a — city. Copen¬ 
hagen is also a — city, but Copenhagen is not so big a 
city — London. Helen is a big girl, but she is- 
big as John. 
Is Baby — big — Helen? No, Baby is-big as 
Helen. Is John — big — his father? No, John is — 
— big — his father. John is bigger — Helen, and Mrs. 
Smith is bigger — John. Helen is — than John. — 
is the biggest of the three children? John is the — of 
the three children. — is the biggest of the cities in 
Europe? London is the — city in Europe. — is the 
name of the biggest city in Norway? It is —. Where 
— London? London is in —. — is Paris? Paris is 
in —. — is Stockholm? Stockholm is in —. — is 
Berlin? Berlin is in —. — is Moscow? Moscow is 
in —. 
WORDS: 
live 
house 
window 
door 
wall 
roof 
top 
where? 
France 
French 
Sweden 
Swede 
Germany 
German 
Denmark 
Dane 
Norway 
Norwegian 
Europe 
England 
English 
Russia 
Russian 
Finland 
Finlander 
country 
city 
Paris 
Stockholm 
Berlin 
Oslo 
Helsinki 
Helsingfors 
Copenhagen 
Moscow 
35 
Chapter Four (4). 
London 
big 
so 
as 
small 
men 
women 
people 
forty-five 
million 
more 
EXERCISE B. 
What people live in England? ... What people live in 
Russia? ... What people live in Sweden? ... Is England 
bigger than Denmark? ... Is England bigger than 
France? ... Is Norway bigger than Sweden? ... What 
people live in Norway? ... Is Russia bigger than 
Germany? ... What people live in Germany? ... What 
people live in France? ... Is the house of Mr. and Mrs. 
Smith a big house? ... Is Baby a big girl? ... Is Helen 
smaller than John? ... Is Helen bigger than her mother? 
... What are boys and girls? ... What are men, women, 
and children? ... Are there many people in England? 
... How many people are there in Finland? ... Are 
there more people in Denmark than in Sweden? ... 
Are there more people in England than in Denmark? 
... Are there more Danes than Swedes? ... How many 
boys and girls have Mr. and Mrs. Smith? ... 
36 
Chapter Five (5). 
The Fifth (5th) Chapter. 
THE BODY 
A person has four limbs. All persons have four limbs. 
a pd:sn hcez fa: limz. a:l pa:snz hcev fa: limz. 
The four limbs are on the body. The four limbs are the 
da fa: limz a: an da badi. da fa: limz a: da 
two arms and the two legs. How many limbs has John? 
tu: a:mz and da tu: legz . hau meni limz hcez dyn? 
John has four limbs. What are the four limbs? The four 
dyn hcez fa: limz. hwat a: da fa: limz? da fa: 
limbs are the two arms and the two legs. On the arm 
limz a: da tu: a:mz and da tu: legz. an di a:m 
is a hand, and the hand has five fingers. Where are the 
iz a hcend, and da hcend hcez faiv fiygaz. hwear a: da 
hands? The hands are on the arms. How many fingers 
hcendz? da hcendz a: an di a:mz. hau meni fiygaz 
i 
has the hand? The hand has five fingers. 
hcez da hcend? da hcend hcez faiv fiygaz. 
On the leg is a foot, and the foot has five toes. All legs 
an da leg iz a fut, and da fut hcez faiv touz. a:l legz 
have feet, and all feet have five toes. Where are the 
hcev fi:t, and a:l fi:t hcev faiv touz. hwear a: da 
feet? The feet are on the legs. How many toes has the 
fi:t? da fi:t a: an da legz. hau meni touz hcez da 
one toe 
two toes 
foot? The foot has five toes. How many fingers has 
fut? da fut hcez faiv touz. hau meni fiygaz hcez 
one foot 
two feet 
37 
Chapter Five (5). 
John's hair = the 
hair of John. 
Mrs.Smith'shair = 
the hair of Mrs. 
Smith. 
Helen? She has ten fingers on her two hands. How many 
helin? fi: haz ten figgaz on ha: tu: hands, hau meni 
toes has she? She has ten toes on her two feet. The body 
tons her2 fi:? fi: haz ten touz on ho: tu: fi:t. fro bodi 
has a head. What is the head? The head is the top of 
has a hed. hwot iz da hed? da hed iz da top av 
the body. On the head many persons have hair. Not 
da bodi. on da hed meni pa:snz hcev hed. not 
all persons have hair; many old men have no hair. 
o:l pa:snz hcev hea; meni ould men hav nou hea. 
Has Mr. Smith long hair? No, he has short hair. Is Mrs. 
hcez mist a smip log hea? nou, hi: haz jo:t hea. iz misiz 
Smith’s hair long? Yes, she has long hair; she has longer 
smips hea log? jes, fi: hcez log hea; fi: haz logga 
hair than Mr. Smith. Is Helens hair also long? No, she 
hea dan mist a smip. iz helinz hea o:lsoulog? nou, fi: 
has short hair, but John’s hair is shorter than Helen’s. 
has fo:t hea, b\t dynz hea iz fo:ta dan helinz. 
Who has most hair, Mrs. Smith or Helen or John? Mrs. 
hu: haz moust hea, misiz smip o: helin o: dyn? misiz 
Smith has most hair; her hair is the longest. Has John 
smip haz moust hea; ha: hea iz da log gist, haz dyn 
more hair than Helen? No, Helen has more hair than 
mo: hea dan helin? nou, helin haz mo: hea dan 
John, but Mrs. Smith has most hair of all the persons 
dyn, b\t misiz smip haz moust hea av o:l da pa:snz 
38 
in the family. Mrs. Smith has long hair; she has much 
in da feemili. misiz smip hcez log hea; fi: haz niAtf 
The Fifth (5th) Chapter. 
hair. She has more hair than Helen. She has most hair 
hea. fi: hcez mo: hea dcen helin. fi: hcez moust hed 
of all the persons in the family. Has John much hair? 
sv o:l da pa:snz in da fcemili. hcez dyn mAtf he a? 
No, he has not much hair; his hair is short; but Mrs. 
nou, hi: hcez not mAtf hea; hiz hea iz jo:t; hAt misiz 
Smith has much hair; she has more hair than Mr. Smith 
smip hcez mAtf hea; fi: hcez mo: hea dcen mist a smip 
and the children. Have all men and women hair? No, 
and da tfildran. hcev o:l men and wimin hea? nou, 
not all men and women have hair; but most persons 
not o:l men and zuimin hcev hea; bAt moust pa:snz 
have hair. 
hcev hea. 
A person has a face. The face has two eyes and two 
a pa:sn hcez a feis. da feis hcez tu: adz and tu: 
ears. All persons have faces, and all faces have two 
iaz. o:l pa.snz hcev feisiz, and o:l feisiz hcev tu: 
eyes and two ears. How many eyes has Helen? Helen 
aiz and tu: iaz. hau meni aiz hcez helinf helin 
has two eyes; she has also two ears. Helen has also a 
hcez tu: aiz; fi: hcez o:lsou tu: iaz. helin hcez o:lsou a 
mouth and a nose in her face. Where are the nose and 
maup and a nouz in ha: feis. hwear a: da nouz and 
the mouth? They are in the face. What is the face? 
da maup? dei a: in da feis. hzvot iz da feis? 
The face is part of the head. What is on the head? 
da feis iz pa:t av da hed. hwot iz on da hed? 
much 
more 
most 
Mrs. Smith has 
much hair. 
She has more hair 
than Helen. 
She has most hair 
of all the persons 
in the family. 
many 
more 
most 
There are many 
people in Sweden. 
There are more 
people in England. 
There are most 
people in 
Germany. 
2/2 
39 
Chapter Five (5). 
There is hair on the head. Is the arm bigger than the 
dear iz he a an da hed. iz di a:m big a dcen da 
leg? No, the arm is smaller than the leg. 
leg? nou, di a:m iz smo:la dcen da leg. 
Are the fingers part of the face? No, the fingers are 
a: da fiygez pa:t av da feis? nou, da fiygaz a: 
part of the hands. What are the hands part of? The 
pa:t av da hcendz. hwot a: da hcendz pa:t ov? da 
hands are part of the arms. What are the ears part of? 
hcendz a: pa:t av di a:mz. hwot a: di iaz pa:t ov? 
The ears are part of the head. Are the feet part of the 
di iaz a: pa:t av da hed. a: da fi:t pa:t av di 
arms or of the legs? The feet are part of the legs. Is 
a:mz o: av da legz? da fi:t a: pa:t av da legz. iz 
the baby a boy or a girl? She is a girl. Is Mr. Smith 
da beibi a boi o: a ga:l? fi: iz a ga:l. iz mist a smip 
young or old? He is young. 
j\fj o: ould? hi: iz jAy. 
The neck is part of the body. On the neck is the head. 
da nek iz pa:t av da bodi. on da nek iz da hed. 
The stomach is also part of the body. The stomach is 
da stAmak iz o:lsou pa:t av da bodi. da stAmak iz 
at the front of the body. The back is also part of the 
cet da frAnt av da bodi. da bcek iz o.lsou pa:t av da 
body. The back is at the back of the body. The arms 
bodi. da bcek iz cet da bcek av da bodi. di a:mz 
are at the sides of the body. Where is the neck? The 
a: cet da saidz av da bodi. hwear iz da nek? da 
40 
The Fifth (5th) Chapter. 
neck is at the top of the body. Is the back at the top 
nek iz cet da top av da bodi. iz da bcek cat da top 
of the body? No, it is at the back of the body* Where 
av da bodif non, it iz cet da bcek av da bodi. hwear 
is the stomach? The stomach is at the front of the body. 
iz da stAmakf da stAmak iz cet da frAnt av da bodi. 
The face is at the front of the head, and the ears are at 
da feis iz cet da frAnt av da hed, and di iaz a: cet 
the sides of the head. Where are the arms? The arms 
da saidz av da hed. hwear a: di a:mz? di a:rnz 
are at the sides of the body. 
a: cet da saidz av da bodi. 
EXERCISE A. 
The body has four —. The four limbs of the body are 
the two — and the two —. On the arm is a —, and 
the hand has five —. The foot has five —. There 
are ten toes on the two —. On the — is hair. The 
head has a —. The face has two —, two —, a —, and 
a —. Mrs. Smith has — hair; her hair is — than 
Helen's; she has the — hair of all the persons in the 
family. John's hair is —; it is — than Helen's hair, 
but Baby has the — hair of all the children. — Helen 
much hair? No, she has not — hair, but she has — 
hair than John. Mrs. Smith has — hair of all the 
persons in the family. 
WORDS: 
body 
all 
limb 
arm 
leg 
on 
or 
hand 
finger 
foot 
feet 
toe 
head 
41 
Chapter Five (5). 
part 
at 
hair 
long 
short 
much 
face 
eye 
ear 
mouth 
nose 
neck 
stomach 
front 
back 
side 
most 
There are not — people in Denmark. There are — 
people in Sweden — in Denmark, but there are — 
people in Germany. Mr. — house is in England. 
Mrs. — hair is long. The windows are in the walls — 
the house. The roof-house is at the top. The — 
is at the top of the body, and on the neck is the —. 
The arms are at the — of the body. The back is at the 
— of the —. The stomach is at the — of the body. Are 
the hands part of the arms — of the legs? — are part 
of the arms. Is Baby a boy — a girl? She is a —. 
— are the feet part of? They are part of the —. 
What are the fingers — of? — are part of the hands. 
— is the face? The face is-front of the head. 
— all persons faces? Yes, — persons have faces, and 
all faces have two —, two —, a —, and a —. Have — 
persons hair? No, but — persons have hair. 
EXERCISE B. 
How many limbs has a person? ... What are the four 
limbs? ... Where are the fingers? ... What are the 
hands part of? ... On what part of the body are the 
toes? ... How many fingers and toes has Helen? ... 
How many legs has a person? ... What is in the face? 
... Where is the stomach? ... Where are the arms? ... 
Is the neck at the top of the body? ... Where is the 
head? ... What is on the head? ... Has Helen more 
hair than Mrs. Smith? ... Has Mrs. Smith much hair? 
... Which has most hair of all the persons in the family? 
42 
The Fifth (5th) Chapter. 
... Which of the children has the shortest hair? ... 
Have all people hair? ... What is at the back of the 
body? ... Are there many people in Denmark? ... Are 
there more people in England than in Germany? ... 
Which of the children is the biggest? ... Which is the 
smallest of the children? ... Is Helen bigger than 
John? ... 
43 
Chapter Six (6). 
The Sixth (6th) Chapter. 
branch 
tall = high 
tall 
high 
Big persons are 
tall. 
Big houses are 
high. 
THE GARDEN 
Mr. Smith’s house is in a garden. In the garden there 
mist9 smips haus iz in d ga:dn. in dd ga:dn dear 
are many trees. There are big trees and there are 
a: meni tri:z. dear a: big tri:z and dear a: 
small trees in the garden. The big trees are tall. The 
smod tri:z in da ga:dn. da big tri:z a: tod. da 
small trees are low. Where is Mr. Smith’s house? It is 
smod tri:z a: lou. hwear iz mista smips hausf it iz 
in a garden. Are there only tall trees in the garden? 
in a ga:dn. a: dea ounli tod tri:z in da ga:dn? 
No, there are also low trees. Is Mr. Smith’s house a 
non, dear a: odsou lou tri:z. iz mista smips haus a 
high house? No, it is not high; it is only low, but it 
hai hausf nou, it iz not hai; it iz ounli lou, bAt it 
is higher than the low trees. The tall trees are higher 
iz haia dean da lou tri:z. da tod tri':z a: haia 
than the house. Are all the trees in the garden tall? 
dean da haus. a: od da tri:z in da ga:dn to:lf 
No, some of the trees are tall, and some of the trees 
nou, Sadi av da tri:z a: tod, and SAm av da tri:z 
are low. Are all persons big? No, some persons are 
a: lou. a: od pa:snz bigf nou, saw pa:snz a: 
big, and some persons are small. Mr. Smith is tall, 
big, and sadi pa:snz a: smod. mista snmp iz tod, 
44 
The Sixth (6th) Chapter. 
but Mrs. Smith is not so tall. She is taller than John 
b\t misiz smip iz not sou toil . fi: iz toila dan dyn 
and Helen. Are all persons tall? No, some persons 
and helin. a: oil paisnz toil? non, sAin paisnz 
are tall, and some persons are short. 
a: toil, and saih paisnz a: foit. 
A tree is a plant; a flower is a plant. Trees are tall 
a tri: iz a pla:nt; a flaua iz a plaint. tri:z a: tail 
plants. A bush is also a plant. Flowers and grass are 
plaints, a buj iz oilsou a plaint, flauaz and grais ai 
low plants. Are trees the only plants in the garden? 
lou plaints. ai triiz di ounli plaints in da gaidn? 
No, there are also other plants in the garden. Is Helen 
nou, dear a: oilsou Ada plaints in da gaidn. iz helin 
the only girl in the family? No, there is also another 
di ounli gail in da fcemili? nou, dear iz oilsou a'nAda 
girl in the family; the baby is the other girl in the 
gail in da fcemili; da beibi iz di Ada gail in da 
family. There is only one son in the family; John is 
fcemili. dear iz ounli WAn SAn in da fcemili; dyn iz 
the only son in the family. 
di ounli SAn in da fcemili. 
Which of the plants in the garden are the biggest? The 
hwitf av da plaints in da gaidn ai da bigistf da 
trees are the biggest plants. What are the other plants 
triiz a: da bigist plaints. hwot ai di Ada plaints 
low 
short 
Small trees and 
small houses are 
low. 
Small persons are 
short. 
in the garden? The other plants are the flowers, the 
in da gaidn? di Ada plaints ai da flauaz, da 
45 
Chapter Six (6). 
bush 
bushes, and the grass. The trees and the flowers have 
bufiz, and da gra:s. da tri:z and da flauaz hcev 
grass 
leaves. The colour of a leaf is green. Are the bushes 
liivz. da k\la av a liif iz gri:n. a: da bufiz 
tall plants? No, the bushes are low plants; they have 
tail plaintsf nou, da bufiz a: lou plaints; dei hcev 
branches and leaves. Have flowers branches? No, 
brainfiz and liivz. hcev flauaz bramfiz? nou, 
one branch 
two branches 
flowers have no branches, but they have leaves. Have 
flauaz hcev nou brainfiz, b\t dei hcev liivz. hcev 
trees branches? Yes, trees have branches as well as 
triiz brainfizt jes, triiz hcev brainfiz cez wel cez 
one bush 
two bushes 
leaves. What is the colour of grass? The colour of 
liivz. hwjt iz da kAla av graisf da kAla av 
grass is green. Have the trees and the bushes leaves? 
grais iz grim. hcev da triiz and da bufiz liivz? 
one leaf 
two leaves 
Yes, both the trees and the bushes have leaves. 
jes, boup da triiz and da bufiz hcev liivz. 
What is the colour of a leaf? The colour of a leaf is 
hwot iz da kAla av a liif? da kAla av a liif iz 
green. Are there flowers only in the garden? No, 
grim. a: dea flauaz ounli in da gaidn? nou, 
Mrs. Smith has some flowers in the house; there are 
misiz smip hcez sath flauaz in da haus; dear a: 
(iff 
flowers both in the garden and in the house. There 
flauaz boup in da gaidn and in da haus. dear 
leaf 
are flowers in the house as well as in the garden. Are 
a; flauaz in da haus cez wel cez in da gaidn. ai 
46 
The Sixth (6th) Chapter. 
both Helen and Alice girls? Yes, both Helen and Alice 
boup helin and cells gailzf jes, boup helin and cells 
are girls. John and Helen as well as the baby are 
a: gailz. dpn and helin cez wel cez da beibi a: 
children. Have the girls short hair? Yes, both of the 
tfildran. hcev da gailz jo it he a? jes, boup av da 
girls have short hair. Both Helen and the baby have 
ga:lz hcev fait hea. boup helin and da beibi hcev 
short hair. 
fait hea. 
Some trees in the garden have fruit. 
saw, tri:z in da gaidn hcev fruit. 
An apple is a fruit. 
an cepl iz a fru:t. 
What is a pear? 
hzvat iz a peaf 
A pear is a fruit. 
a pea iz a fruit. 
A pear is a fruit. 
a pea iz a fruit. 
Are there other fruits? Yes, the apple is another fruit. 
ai dea Ada fruitst jes, di cepl iz a'n\da fruit. 
The year has four seasons. Summer is a season, winter 
da jia hcez fai siiznz. s\ma iz a siizn, winta 
is a season, spring is a season, and autumn is a season. 
iz a siizn, sprirj iz a siizn, and aitam iz a siizn. 
The summer-months are June, July, and August. The 
da sAmamAnps ai dgum, d^uHai, and aigast. di 
autumn-months are September, October, and November. 
aitammAnps ai sap'temba, ak'touba, and nou'vemba. 
The winter-months are December, January, and Fe- 
da wintamAnps a: di'semba, d^cenjuari, and fe- 
bruary. The spring-months are March, April, and May. 
bruari. da spriymAnps ai maitf, eipril, and mei. 
both - and 
as well as 
Both Helen and 
the baby are girls. 
Helen and John as 
well as the baby 
are children. 
both of 
Both of the girls 
are young. 
47 
Chapter Six (6). 
apple 
are in blossom = 
have flowers 
when? 
when 
When is spring? 
Spring is when 
the fruit trees are 
in blossom. 
How many seasons has a year? A year has four seasons. 
hau meni siiznz hcez a jiaf a jia hcez fai si:znz. 
What are the four seasons? The four seasons are spring, 
hwat a: da fa: si:znzf da fa: siiznz a: sprit), 
summer, autumn, and winter. How long is a season? 
SAina, a:tam, and winta. hau lay iz a si:zn? 
A season is three months. When is summer? Summer 
a siizn iz pri: mxnps. hwen iz SAinaf SAma 
is the months of June, July, and August. When is 
iz da mAtips av d$u:n, d^u'lai, and a:gast . hwen iz 
winter? Winter is the months of December, January, 
winta ? winta iz da niAnps av di'semba, d^cenjuari, 
and February. In spring the fruit trees are in blossom; 
and februari. in spriy da fru:t triiz a: in blasam; 
the fruit trees are in blossom when it is spring. 
da fru:t tri:z a: in blasam hwen it iz spriy. 
The trees have no leaves when it is winter. In summer 
da tri:z hcev nou li:vz hwen it iz winta. in SAina 
and autumn the trees have fruit. When are the fruit 
and a:tam da tri:z hcev fru:t. hwen a: da fru:t 
trees in blossom? The fruit trees are in blossom in 
tri:z in blasamf da fru:t tri:z a: in blasam in 
spring. When have the trees fruit? The trees have 
spriy. hwen hcev da tri:z fruitf da triiz hcev 
fruit in summer and in autumn. Have the bushes also 
fruit in SAina and in aitarn. hcev da bufiz ailsou 
fruit? Yes, some of the bushes have fruit. The fruits 
fruit? jes, saw av da bufiz hcev fruit. da fruits 
48 
The Sixth (6th) Chapter. 
of the bushes are berries. What is a berry? A berry 
av da bufiz a: beriz. hwat iz a berif a beri 
is the small fruit of a bush. 
iz da sma:l fru:t av a buj. 
In winter it is cold. On some days in winter there is 
in winta it iz kould. an sAtn deiz in winta dear iz 
snow. The colour of snow is white. Is it warm in 
snou. da kAla av snou iz hwait. iz it wa:m in 
winter? No, it is cold in winter, but in summer it is 
winta? nou, it iz kould in winta, bAt in SAtna it iz 
warm. What is the colour of snow? The colour of 
iva:m. hwat iz da kAla av snou? da kAla av 
snow is white. Is snow cold or warm? Snow is cold. 
snou iz hwait. iz snou kould a: wa:m? snou iz kould. 
Is there snow in summer? No, in summer it is warm, 
iz dea snou in sxma? nou, in SAma it iz wa:m, 
and there is no snow. 
and dear iz nou snou. 
EXERCISE A. 
Mr. Smith’s house is in a —. In the — are many trees. 
Are all the — in the garden small? No, there are big 
— and small —. The big trees are —, and the small 
trees are —. Mr. Smith’s house is not high; it is —, 
but it is — than the low trees. Trees and flowers are —, 
one day 
two days 
one berry 
two berries 
berries 
WORDS: 
garden 
tree 
flower 
bush 
49 
Chapter Six (6). 
grass 
plant 
leaf 
branch 
pear 
apple 
berry 
fruit 
white 
green 
colour 
summer 
winter 
spring 
autumn 
season 
snow 
blossom 
cold 
warm 
tall 
high 
low 
other 
an 
another 
some 
both 
well 
when? 
when 
and bushes are also —. Helen is not the only — in the 
family; there is also — girl in the family; the baby is 
the — girl in the family. John is the — son in the 
family. 
Trees have —. Bushes have also —. The colour of 
a leaf is —. The — of leaves is green. Trees and bushes 
have —. — have no branches. Trees have both leaves 
and —. Bushes have — leaves — branches. — trees — 
bushes have leaves. Bushes — well — trees have leaves. 
Flowers are not green; they have many — colours. 
Mrs. Smith has some flowers in the house, and she has 
also — flowers in the garden. She has flowers in the 
house-in the garden. Many — have fruit. 
A pear is a —, and an apple is a —. Pears and apples 
are —. 
— many seasons are there in a year? There are — 
seasons in a year. What are the four — of the year?. 
They are: —, —, —, and —. Which — the months are 
summer-months? The summer-months are —, —, 
and —.-the months are autumn-months? The 
autumn-months are —, —, and —. — is winter? The 
winter-months are —, —, and —. — of the months are 
spring-months? The spring-months are —, —, and —. 
When — spring? Spring is — the fruit trees are in —. 
The trees have fruit in — and in —. Is it warm — cold 
in winter? In winter it is —, and on some days there 
is —. — is the colour of snow? The colour of snow 
is —.-cold in summer? No, in summer it is —. 
50 
The Sixth (6th) Chapter. 
EXERCISE B. 
Where is Mr. Smith’s house? ... Are all the trees in the 
garden tall? ... Is Mr. Smith’s house high? ... Are all 
persons big? ... What is a tree? ... What are the other 
plants in the garden? ... What is the colour of a leaf? 
... Have trees and bushes leaves? ... Have they also 
branches? ... Has Mrs. Smith flowers in the garden 
only? ... Are all persons tall? ... Are both of the parents 
young? ... Are both John and Helen children? ... What 
are pears and apples? ... What are the fruits of 
bushes? ... What is a berry? ... How many seasons has 
a year? ... What are the four seasons? ... When is 
summer? ... When is winter? ... When have the trees 
fruit? ... When are the trees in blossom? ... 
51 
Chapter Seven (7). 
The Seventh (7th) Chapter. 
THE WEEK 
The day after Sunday is Monday. The day after 
da dei a:ftd SAndi iz mxndi. da dei a:fta 
Monday is Tuesday. The day before Sunday is Saturday. 
mAfidi is tju:zdi. da dei bi'fj: SAndi iz scetadi. 
The day before Saturday is Friday. The day after 
da dei bi'fj: scetadi iz fraidi. da dei a:fta 
Wednesday is Thursday. The day before Wednesday 
wenzdi iz pa:zdi. da dei bi'fj: wenzdi 
is Tuesday. It is Wednesday to-day. The day after 
iz tju:zdi. it iz wenzdi ta'dei. da dei a:fta 
to-day is Thursday. It is Thursday to-morrow. The 
ta'dei iz paizdi . it iz pa:zdi ta'mjrou. da 
day before to-day was Tuesday. It was Tuesday 
dei bi'fj: ta'dei wjz tjuizdi. it wjz tju:zdi 
is 
are 
was 
were 
To-day John is at 
school. 
Yesterday John 
was not at school. 
To-day the 
children are at 
school. 
Yesterday the 
children were not 
at school. 
yesterday. The day before yesterday was Monday. The 
jestadi. da dei bi'fj: jestadi wjz mAndi. da 
day after to-morrow is Friday. 
dei a:fta ta'mjrou iz fraidi. 
What day is to-day? To-day is Wednesday. What 
hwjt dei iz ta'dei? ta'dei iz wenzdi. hwjt 
day was yesterday? Yesterday was Tuesday. What 
dei wjz jestadi? jestadi wjz tju:zdi. hwjt 
day was the day before yesterday? The day before 
dei xv jz da dei bi'fj: jestadi? da dei bi'fj: 
52 
The Seventh (7th) Chapter. 
yesterday was Monday. 
jestddi wjz mAndi. 
To-morrow is Thursday. 
ta'mjrou iz pa:zdi. 
What day is to-morrow? 
hwat dei iz ta'mjrou? 
What day is the day after 
hwot dei iz da dei a:fta 
to-morrow? The day after to-morrow is Friday. 
ta'mjrou? da dei a:fta ta'mjrou iz fraidi. 
John and Helen are at school to-day. They go to school 
dyn and helin a: cet sku:l ta'dei. dei gou ta sku:l 
every day of the week except on Saturdays and Sundays. 
evri dei av da wi:k ik'sept jn scetadiz and SAndiz. 
They go to school every month of the year except in 
dei gou ta sku:l evri mAnp av da jia ik'sept in 
July and August. To-day is Wednesday; John goes to 
dy'lai and j:gast. ta'dei iz wenzdi; dyn gouz ta 
school on Wednesdays. Both John and Helen go to 
4ku:l jn wenzdiz. boup dyn and helin gou ta 
school on Wednesdays. The day before yesterday was 
sku:l an wenzdiz. da dei bi'fj: jestadi wjz 
Monday. John was at school on Monday. John and 
mAndi. dyn zvaz cet sku:l an mAndi. dyn and 
Helen were both at school on Monday. Was Helen at 
helm wa: boup cet sku:l an mAndi. wjz helin cet 
school the day before yesterday? Yes, she was. Were 
sku:l da dei bi'fj: jestadi? jes, fi: wjz. wa: 
both of the children at school on Monday? Yes, they 
boup av da tfildran cet sku:l an mAndi? jes, dei 
were both at school on Monday. John is at school 
wa: boup cet sku.l an mAndi. dyn iz cet sku:l 
goes 
go 
went 
He goes every day. 
They go everyday. 
He went yester¬ 
day. 
They went 
yesterday. 
53 
Chapter Seven (7). 
does 
do 
He does. 
They do. 
He is. Is he? 
They are. Are 
they? 
He has. Has he? 
They have. Have 
they? 
He learns. Does he 
learn? 
They learn. Do 
they learn? 
He goes. Does 
he go? 
They go. Do they 
go? 
both of = both 
Both of the 
children went to 
school = both the 
children went to 
school. 
to-day. He also went to school the day before yesterday. 
ta'dei. hi: a:lsou went ta sku:l da dei bi'fa: jestadi. 
Both the children went to school on Monday. 
boup da tjildran went ta sku:l an mAndi. 
The schools in England are English. The schools in 
da sku.lz in iy gland a: iyglif . da sku:lz in 
France are French. In some French schools the children 
fra:ns a: frenf. in saw frenf sku:lz da tjildran 
learn English. John goes to an English school. He 
la:n iyglif. dyn gouz tu an iyglif sku:l. hi: 
learns French at school. Does John go to school? Yes, 
la:nz frenf cet sku:l. dAZ dyn gou ta sku:lf jes, 
he does; he goes to school every day except on Satur- 
hi.\ dAz; hi: gouz ta sku:l evri dei ik'sept an sceta - 
days and Sundays. Does Helen go to school? Yes, she 
diz and SAndiz. dAZ helin gou ta sku:l? jes, fi: 
does; she also goes to school. Does John learn French? 
dAz; fi: a:lsou gouz ta sku:l. dAZ dyn la:n frenff 
Yes, he does; he learns French at school. Do both the 
jes, hi: dAz; hi: la:nz frenf cet sku:l. du: boup da 
children learn French? No, only John learns French; 
tjildran lain frenf? nou, ounli dyn la:nz frenf; 
Helen is too young to learn French; she is only ten years 
helin iz tu: jAy ta la:n frenf; fi: iz ounli ten jiaz 
old. Do the French children learn English? Yes, they 
ould. du: da frenf tjildran la:n iyglif? jes, dei 
do; they learn English at school. 
du:; dei la:n iyglif cet sku:l. 
54 
The Seventh (7th) Chapter. 
The schools in Denmark are Danish. Many Danish 
dd skuilz in denmaik a: deinif. meni deinif 
children learn English at school. The children 
tfildrdn h:n iyglif at sku:l. dd tfildrdn 
learn to read at school. They read books. They 
le:n td ri:d at sku:l. dei ri:d buks. dei 
also learn to write. The big children write with 
o:lsou ld:n td rait. dd big tfildrdn rait wid 
pens and ink. The small children write with pencils. 
penz dnd iyk. dd smo:l tfildrdn rait wid pensilz. 
They write on paper. What does John do at school? 
dei rait on peipd. hwot d\z dyn du: at sku:l? 
He learns to read and to write. What does Helen do 
hi: ld:nz td ri:d dnd td rait. hwot dAZ helin du: 
at school? She learns to read and to write. What do 
at sku:lf fi: Idinz td ri:d dnd td rait. hwot du: 
the other children do at school? They also learn to 
di Add tfildrdn du: cet sku:lf dei oilsou ld:n td 
read and to write. What does John learn to do? He 
ri:d dnd td rait. hwot dAZ dyn ld:n td du:? hi: 
learns to read and to write. What does Helen learn 
h:nz td ri:d dnd td rait. hwot dAZ helin lo:n 
to do? She learns to read and to write. What do the 
td du:? fi: Idinz td ri:d dnd td rait. hwot du: di 
other children learn to do? They also learn to read 
Add tfildrdn ld:n td du:? dei oilsou ld:n td ri:d 
and to write. 
dnd td rait. 
55 
Chapter Seven (7). 
to do 
to read 
to write 
What does John 
learn to do at 
school? 
What does John do on Sundays? On Sundays he reads 
hwot d\z dyn du: on SAndizf on SAndiz hi: ri:dz 
a book or plays with a ball in the garden. What does 
d bak o: pleiz wid d bo:l in da ga:dn. hwot d\z 
He learns to read 
and to write. 
the [do] [before 
to [to] ) 
b 
c 
d 
f 
i 
i 
1 
m 
n 
P 
q 
r 
8 
t 
v 
Helen do on Sundays? She plays with her doll, or she 
helin du: on SAndiz? ji: pleiz wid ha: dol, o: fi: 
and John play with their ball. What do children do 
and dyn plei wid dea bod. hwot du: tjildran du: 
when they are not at school? They read their school- 
hwen dei a: not cet skudf dei ri:d dea sku.l- 
books and play in the garden and in the house with 
buks and plei in da ga:dn and in da hcius wid 
dolls and with balls. What does John read? He reads 
dolz and wid bodz. hwot dAZ dyn ri:df hi: ri:dz 
an ) 
the [Ji] [before 
to [tu] } 
a 
e 
i 
o 
u 
(h) 
a man 
an ink-stand 
a young [/a**] man 
an old man 
the [8o] man 
the [Ji] ink-stand 
the [do] young 
[jAti] man 
the [Ji] old man 
to [to] school 
to [tu] an English 
school 
books. What does Helen write with? She writes with 
buks. hwot dAZ helin rait wid? fi: raits wid 
a pen and ink. 
a pen and iyk. 
Where is the ink? The ink is in the ink-stand. What 
hwear iz di iyk? di iyk iz in di iykstcend. hwot 
is the colour of ink? The colour of ink is blue. What 
iz da kAla av iyk? da k\la av iyk iz bin:, hwot 
is the colour of John’s eyes? They are also blue. Many 
iz da kAla av dynz aiz? dei a: odsou blu:. meni 
people in England have blue eyes. What do the small 
pi:pi in iygland hcev blu: aiz. hwot du: da smod 
children write with? They write with pencils. What 
tfildran rait zvid? dei rait wid pensilz. hwot 
56 
The Seventh (7th) Chapter. 
do the children write on? They write on paper. 
du: dd tfildran rait on? dei rait on peipd. 
Does John go to school on Sundays? No, he does not; 
dAZ dyn gou to sku:l on s\ndizf nou, hi: dAZ not; 
on Sundays he is in the garden, or he reads a book in 
on SAndiz hi: iz in dd ga:dn, o: hi: ri:dz a buk in 
the house. Does Helen also read on Sundays? No, she 
da haus. dAZ helin odsou ri:d on SAndizf nou , fi: 
does not; she plays with a ball in the garden or with 
dAZ not; fi: pleiz wid a bod in da ga:dn o: wid 
her doll. Does Baby play with a ball? No, she does 
ha: dol. dAZ beibi plei wid a bod? nou, fi: dAZ 
not; she is too small to play with a ball; she plays with 
not; fi: iz tu: smo:l ta plei wid a bod; fi: pleiz wid 
a small doll and with her toes. Does John play with 
a smod dol and zvid ha: touz. dAZ dyn plei wid 
a doll? No, he does not; boys do not play with dolls. 
a dol? nou, hi: dAZ not; boiz du: not plei wid dolz. 
Does John learn German at school? No, he does not; 
dAZ dyn la:n d$a:man eet skud? nou, hi: d*z not; 
he learns French. Do the small children write with 
hi: la:nz frenf. du: da smod tfildran rait wid 
pens and ink? No, they do not; they are too small to 
penz and iyk? nou, dei du: not; dei a: tu: smod ta 
write with pens and ink. Do the parents go to school? 
rait wid penz and iyk. du: da pear ants gou ta skud? 
No, they do not; they are too old to go to school, but 
nou, dei du: not; dei a: tu: ould ta gou ta skud, bAt 
does not 
do not 
Helen is not a boy. 
They are not old. 
The baby has not 
much hair. 
They have not 
many children. 
She does not read. 
They do not read. 
He does not write. 
They do not write. 
57 
Chapter Seven (7). 
they went to school when they were children. John 
dei went td sku:l hwen dei wa: tfildran. dyn 
does not go to school on Sundays. Helen does not learn 
d\z not gou ta sku:l on sxndiz. helin dAZ not la:n 
Russian at school. The children in England do not learn 
rxjan <zt sku:l. da tfildran in iygland du: not la:n 
Russian at school. Baby does not go to school; she is 
r\fan cet sku:l. beibi d\z not gou ta sku:l; ji: iz 
too young to go to school; she is only six months old. 
tu: j\Y} ta gou ta sku:l; ji: iz ounli siks mAnps ould. 
John’s parents do not go to school; they are too old 
dynz pearants du: not gou ta sku:l; dei a: tu: ould 
to go to school, but when they were young, they went 
ta gou ta sku:l, bAt hwen dei wa: )Afj, dei went 
to school. John and Helen go to school; they are not 
ta sku:l. dyn and helin gou ta sku:l; dei a: not 
too old to go to school. 
tu: ould to gou ta sku:l. 
Do all the children in the school write with pens and 
du: o:l da tfildran in da sku:l rait wid penz and 
ink? All the children write with pens and ink except 
ifjkf o:l da tfildran rait wid penz and irjk ik'sept 
the small children; they are too young to write with 
da smo:l tfildran; dei a: tu: jAfj ta rait wid 
pens and ink. What do the small children learn to write 
penz and itjk. hwot du: da smo:l tfildran la:n ta rait 
with? They learn to write with pencils. What do 
widf dei la:n ta rait wid pensilz. hwot du: 
too 
to 
Too old to go to 
school. 
58 
The Seventh (7th) Chapter. 
they write on? They write on paper. What is the 
dei rait or? dei rait on peipa. hwot iz do 
colour of the paper? The colour of the paper is white. 
k\ld av da peipa? da k\la av da peipa iz hwait. 
Are the parents too old to play? No, they are not. 
a: da p ear ants tu: ould ta plei? nou, dei a: not. 
Mrs. Smith plays with her baby, and Mr. Smith plays 
misiz smip pleiz wid ha: beibi, and mist a smip pleiz 
with John and Helen in the garden with a ball. 
wid dyn and helin in da ga.dn wid a bod. 
EXERCISE A. 
The day — Sunday is Monday. The day — Sunday is 
Saturday. The day — Saturday is Sunday. The 
day — Friday is Saturday. The day — Friday is Thurs¬ 
day. The day — Wednesday is Thursday. The day — 
Wednesday is Tuesday. To-day — Wednesday, and 
— is Thursday. To-morrow is Friday, and — is Thurs¬ 
day. To-day — Monday, and — was Sunday. Yester¬ 
day — Tuesday, and to-day — Wednesday. To-day is 
Thursday, — is Friday, and the-is Saturday. 
To-day is Tuesday; — was Monday, and the- 
was Sunday. 
To-day is Wednesday; John and Helen are — school 
to-day. John — to school every day — on Saturdays 
59 
Chapter Seven (7). 
WORDS: 
after 
before 
to-day 
to-morrow 
yesterday 
school 
Danish 
learn 
read 
write 
book 
pencil 
pen 
ink 
ink-stand 
paper 
play 
doll 
ball 
blue 
with 
to 
too 
every 
except 
go 
goes 
went 
was 
were 
do 
does 
and Sundays. John and Helen — to school — day 
except on Saturdays and Sundays. John — to school 
the day before yesterday. John and Helen — to school 
the day before yesterday. At some French schools the 
children — English. John — French at school. The 
children — books. John — English and French books. 
Helen does not — French at school; she is only ten-. 
The ink is in the —. The colour of the ink is —. The 
colour of John's eyes is also —. — John learn Russian 
at school? No, he — not learn Russian. — the French 
children learn English at school? Yes, some —. 
— the English children learn Russian? No, they — 
not. — they learn French? Yes, they —. What — 
the children learn at school? They learn — read and 
— write. What — the big children write with? They 
write with — and —. — the small children also write 
with pens and ink? No, they — not write with pens 
and ink. What — they write with? They write 
with —. What — John write on? He writes on —. 
What — Helen write on? She also — on paper. What 
— John do at school? He — to read and to write. 
What does Helen — at school? She also learns — read 
and — write. 
What — the children do on Sundays? They — with 
balls or with dolls. Where — the children play ? They 
— in the garden or in the house. — John play with 
dolls? No, he-play with dolls; he — with a ball 
or — a book. Does the baby — to school? No, she 
is — young to go to school. Are the parents — young 
— go to school? No, they are not — young — go to 
school; they are — old. — Helen old? No, Helen- 
60 
The Seventh (7th) Chapter. 
old. — Helen learn French? No, Helen — not learn 
French. — John a boy? Yes, John — a boy. — he 
learn French? Yes, he — French. Are Helen and 
Baby old? No, Helen and Baby-old. — the 
English children learn Russian? No, the English 
children — not learn Russian. — Helen and Baby 
sisters? Yes, Helen and Baby — sisters. — the 
children learn French? John — French; Helen — not 
learn French; she is — young — learn French; she is — 
ten years old. — John three sisters? No, John- 
three sisters. — Helen and Alice two brothers? No, 
they-two brothers; they have only one. 
EXERCISE B. 
When do the children go to school? . . . Were the 
children at school yesterday? ... Is John at school to¬ 
day? . . . What day is to-morrow? . . . What do the 
children learn at school? ... Do they learn French in 
the English schools? ... Do the children in France learn 
English? ... What do the big children write with? ... 
What do the small children write with? ... What do 
they write on? ... What does John read? ... Does Baby 
go to school? ... Do the parents go to school? ... Are 
John and Helen too young to go to school? ... What 
do the children do after school? . . . Where do they 
play? ... What does Baby play with? ... Does she play 
with a ball? ... 
61 
Chapter Eight (8). 
The Eighth (8th) Chapter. 
THE CLOCK 
A day has twelve hours. A night has also twelve hours. 
a dei hcez twelv auaz. a nait hcez a:lsou twelv auaz. 
A day and a night have twenty-four (24) hours. An 
a dei and a nait hcev twentifa: auaz. an 
hour has sixty (60) minutes, and a minute has sixty (60) 
aua hcez siksti minits, and a minit hcez siksti 
seconds. How many hours has a day? It has twelve 
sekandz. hau meni auaz hcez a dei? it hcez twelv 
hours. How many hours have a day and a night? 
auaz. hau meni auaz hcev a dei and a nait? 
A day and a night have twenty-four (24) hours. How 
a dei and a nait hcev twentifa: auaz. hau 
many minutes are there in an hour? There are sixty (60) 
meni minits a: dee in an aua? dear a: siksti 
minutes in an hour. How many seconds are there in 
minits in an aua. hau meni sekandz a: dea in 
clock 
a minute? There are sixty seconds in a minute. An 
a minit? dear a: siksti sekandz in a minit. an 
hour is a long time; a second is a short time. 
aua iz a lay taim; a sekand iz a ja:t taim. 
On the wall in Mr. Smith’s house is a clock. The clock 
an da wa:l in mist a smips haus iz a klak. da klak 
has a face with twelve figures on it. 1 is a figure, 
hcez a feis wid twelv figaz an it. w\n iz a figs, 
62 
The Eighth (8th) Chapter. 
3 is a figure, 11 is a figure. There are also two 
pri: iz a figs, ilevn iz a figa- dear a: ailsou tu: 
hands on the clock, a long hand and a short hand. The 
hcendz an da klak, a lay hand, and a Ja:t hcend. da 
hands of the clock give the time. The short hand gives 
hcendz av da klak giv da taim. da fa:t hcend givz 
the hours, and the long hand gives the minutes. 
di auaz, and da lay hcend givz da minits. 
Where is Mr. Smith's clock? It is on the wall in his 
hwear iz mist a smips klak? it iz an da wa:l in hiz 
house. What does the clock do? The clock gives the 
haus. hwat d\z da klak du:f da klak givz da 
time of the day; the short hand gives the hours, and 
taim av da dei; da fait hcend givz di auaz, and 
the long hand gives the minutes. Is there no hand to 
da lay hcend givz da minits. iz dea nou hcend ta 
give the seconds? Yes, on the face of the clock there 
giv da sekandzf jes, an da feis av da klak dear 
is another small face with figures and a very small 
iz a'n\da sma:t feis wid figaz and a veri sma:l 
hand. Are the figures also very small? Yes, they are 
hcend. a: da figaz a:lsou veri sma:l? jes, dei a: 
very small. Baby is very young; she is only six months 
veri sma:l. heibi iz veri j\y; fi: iz ounli siks mAnps 
old. Is Mr. Smith very old? No, he is not; he is 
ould. iz mist a smip veri ouldf nou, hi: iz nat; hi: iz 
thirty-six (36) years old. A second is a very short time. 
paiti'siks jiaz ould. a sekand iz a veri fait taim. 
63 
Chapter Eight (8). 
watch 
A watch is smaller than a clock. Mr. Smith has a watch, 
a wotf iz smo.la dan a klok. mista smip haz a wotf, 
and Mrs. Smith has a very small watch on her arm, but 
and misiz smip haz a veri smo:l wotf on ha: a:m, b\t 
John and Helen have no watches; they are too young 
dyn and helin hav nou wotfiz; dei a: tu: j\g 
to have watches. Mr. Smith gave Mrs. Smith her watch 
ta hav wotfiz. mista smip geiv misiz smip ha: wotj 
when she was twenty-five (25) years old. The day 
hwen fi: woz twenti'faiv jiaz ould. da dei 
when she was twenty-five (25) years old was her birth- 
hwen fi: woz tzventi'faiv jiaz ould woz ha: ba:p - 
day. Her birthday is on the twenty-ninth (29th) of 
dei. ha: ba:pdei iz on da twenti'nainp av 
October. John’s birthday is on the twenty-sixth (26th) 
ok'touba. dynz ba.pdei iz on da twenti'siksp 
of July. On his birthday his parents gave him some 
av dy'lai. on hiz ba.pdei hiz pear ants geiv him s\m 
books and a football. 
buks and a futbo:l. 
Has Mrs. Smith a watch? Yes, Mr. Smith gave Mrs. Smith 
haz misiz smip a wotff jes, mista smip geiv misiz smip 
a watch on her birthday, when she was twenty-five (25) 
a wotf on ha: ba:pdei, hwen fi: woz twenti'faiv 
years old. Has John a football? Yes, his parents gave 
jiaz ould. haz dyn a futbo:lf jes, hiz pear ants geiv 
him a football on his birthday. In two years, when he 
him a futbo:l on hiz ba:pdei. in tu: jiaz, hwen hi: 
64 
The Eighth (8th) Chapter. 
is fourteen (14) years old, his father will give him a 
iz jiaz ould, hiz fa:da wil giv him a 
watch on his birthday. When he is fourteen, he will 
zvotf on hiz ba:pdei. hwen hi: iz fo:ti:n, hi: wil 
have a watch. His father will not give him a watch 
hcev a zvotf. hiz fa:da wil not giv him a wotj 
when he is thirteen (13) years old. The children will 
hwen hi: iz pa:ti:n jiaz ould. da tfildran wil 
go to school to-morrow. They will read their books, 
gou ta sku:l ta'moron. dei zvil ri:d dea buks, 
and they will write with pens or pencils. When it is 
and dei wil rait void penz o: pensilz. hwen it iz 
John's birthday, he will be thirteen (13) years old. 
dynz ba:pdei, hi: wil bi: pa:ti:n jiaz ould. 
Helen will be eleven years old on her birthday. Baby 
lielin wil bi: i'levn jiaz ould on ha: ba:pdei. beibi 
will be one year old on her birthday. To-morrow the 
wil bi: WAn jia ould on ha: ba:pdei. ta'morou da 
children will be at school. The parents will not be at 
tfildran wil bi: cet sku:l. da pearants zvil not bi: cet 
school; they will be in the house. After school the 
sku:l; dei wil bi: in da haus. a:fta sku:l da 
children will be in the garden. 
tfildran wil bi: in da ga:dn. 
When will John be fourteen (14) years old? He will 
hzven zvil dyn bi: fo:ti:n jiaz ould? hi: wil 
be fourteen (14) in two years. When is Helen's birthday? 
bi: fo:ti:n in tu: jiaz. hwen iz helinz ba.pdeif 
gives 
give 
gave 
will give 
John gives Helen 
a pear. 
John and Helen 
give Baby a ball. 
Yesterday John 
gave Helen a pear. 
Yesterday John 
and Helen gave 
Baby a ball. 
To-morrow John 
will give Helen 
a pear. 
To-morrow John 
and Helen will 
give Baby a ball. 
65 
Chapter Eight (8). 
is 
are 
was 
were 
will be 
To-day John is at 
school. 
To-day both John 
and Helen are at 
school. 
Yesterday John 
was at school. 
Yesterday both 
John and Helen 
were at school. 
To-morrow John 
will be at school. 
Both John and 
Helen will be at 
school to-morrow. 
Helen’s birthday is on the sixteenth (16th) of March. 
helinz bd’.pdei iz on dd sikstirnp ov ma:tf. 
When is Mr. Smith’s birthday? His birthday is on the 
hwen iz mist3 smips bd’.pdei? hiz bd'.pdei iz on dd 
thirteenth (13th) of July. When is the baby’s birth- 
po:ti:np ov d^u'lai. hwen iz dd beibiz bd.'p- 
day? Her birthday is on the tenth (10th) of June. 
dei? hd: bd'.pdei iz on dd tenp dv d%u:n. 
Where will the children be to-morrow? To-morrow 
hwed wil dd tfildron bi: td'morouf td' moron 
they will be at school. When will the baby be one year 
dei wil bi: cut sku.l. hwen wil dd beibi bi: w\n jid 
old? She will be one year old in six months. Helen 
ouldf fi: wil bi: w\n jid onld in siks niAtips. helin 
will be fourteen (14) in four years. Mrs. Smith will be 
zml bi: fo:ti:n in fo: jidz. misiz smip wil bi: 
thirty-five (35) in three years. 
pd'.ti'faiv in pri: jidz. 
When the short hand is at the figure 2 and the long 
hwen dd fo:t hcend iz cut dd figd tu: dnd dd log 
hand at the figure 12, it is two o’clock. When the short 
hcend cut dd figd twelv, it iz tu: o'klok. hwen dd fo:t 
hand is at 3 and the long hand at 12, it is three o’clock. 
hcend iz cet pri: dnd dd lot) hcend cet twelv, it iz pri: d'klok. 
When the short hand is at 3 and the long hand at 11, 
hwen dd fo:t hcend iz cet pri: dnd dd lot) hcend cet i'levn, 
it is five minutes to three. When the long hand is at 
it iz faiv minits td pri:. hwen dd log hcend iz cet 
66 
The Eighth (8th) Chapter. 
1 and the short hand at 3, it is five minutes past 
WAn and da ja :t hand cat pri:, it iz faiv minits pa:st 
three. What time is it when the short hand is at 4 
pri:, hwat taim iz it hwen da fa:t hand iz cat fa: 
and the long hand at 3? Then it is a quarter past four. 
and da lay hcand cat pri:? den it iz a kwa.ta pa.st fa:. 
What time is it when the short hand is at 5 and the 
hwat taim iz it hzven da fa:t hcand iz cat faiv and da 
long hand at 9? Then it is a quarter to five. What 
lay hcand cat nain? den it iz a kwa: ta ta faiv. hwat 
time is it when the long hand is at 5 and the short 
taim iz it hwen da lay hand iz at faiv and da ja:t 
hand is between 1 and 2? Then it is twenty-five (25) 
hand iz bi'twi:n wau and tu:f den it iz twenttfaiv 
minutes past one. What time is it when the long hand 
minits pa:st wah. hwat taim iz it hwen da lay hand 
is at 6 and the short hand is between 5 and 6? 
iz at siks and da fa:t hand iz bi'twi:n faiv and siks? 
Then it is half past five. Half an hour is thirty (30) 
den it iz ha:f pa:st faiv. ha:f an aua iz pa:ti 
minutes. A quarter of an hour is fifteen (15) minutes. 
minits. a kwa:ta av an aua iz fifti:n minits. 
At what time do the children go to school? They go 
at hwat taim du: da tjildran gou ta sku:l? dei gou 
to school at nine o’clock. (They go to school at nine.) 
ta sku:l at nain a'klak. (dei gou ta sku:l at nain.) 
How long are the children at school? They are at 
hau lay a: da tjildran at sku:l? dei a: at 
What time is it? 
It is two o’clock. 
(It is two.) 
It is ten minutes 
past two. 
It is five minutes 
to two. 
67 
Chapter Eight (8). 
school from nine o'clock to four o’clock (from nine to 
sku:l from nain a'khk td fo: a'khk (from nain td 
four). They are at school from nine o'clock to twelve 
fo:). dei a: cet sku:l from min a'khk td twelv 
o'clock. At twelve o’clock they go to their houses. Then 
a'khk. cet twelv a'khk dei gou ta dea hauziz. den 
they go to school at two o’clock and are there from two 
dei gou ta sku:l cet tu: a'khk and a: dea from tu: 
o’clock to four o’clock. At what time do the children 
a'khk ta fo: a'khk. cet hwot taim du: da tfildran 
go home from school? They go home from school at 
gou houm from sku:l? dei gou houm from sku:l cet 
four o'clock (at four). Their father is not at home when 
fo: a'khk (cet fo:). dea fa:da iz not cet houm hwen 
they come from school, but their mother is at home. 
dei k\m from sku:l, l?At dea m\da iz cet houm. 
Their father comes home at half past five; then all the 
dea fa:da k\mz houm cet ha:f pa:st faiv; den o:l da 
persons in the family are at home. 
pa:snz in da fcemili a: cet houm. 
When the children are at school, they are away from 
hwen da tfildran a: cet sku:l, dei a: a'wei from 
home. They are away from home from nine o'clock 
houm. dei a: a'wei from houm from nain a'khk 
to twelve o’clock, and from two o’clock to four o’clock. 
ta twelv a'khk, and from tu: a'khk ta fo: a'khk. 
They are away from home for five hours. Mr. Smith 
dei a: a'wei from houm fo: faiv auaz. mist a smip 
68 
The Eighth (8th) Chapter. 
goes away from home at half past eight and comes 
gouz d'wei from houm cet ha:f pa:st eit and k\mz 
home at half past five; he is away from home for nine 
houm cet ha:f pa:st faiv; hi: iz d'wei from houm fo: nain 
hours every day. He is at home for fifteen (15) hours. 
audz evri dei. hi: iz cet houm fo: fifti:n auoz. 
The children are at home for nineteen (19) hours. When 
dd tjildran a: cet houm fo: nainti:n auaz. hwen 
does Mr. Smith come home? He comes home at half 
d\z mist a smip hm houmf hi: k\mz houm cet ha:f 
past five. What time is it when Mr. Smith comes 
pa:st faiv. hwot taim iz it hwen mist a smip k\mz 
home? It is half past five. How long is he away from 
houm? it iz ha:f pa:st faiv. hau log iz hi: d'wei from 
home every day? He is away for nine hours. How 
houm evri dei? hi: iz d'wei fo: nain auaz. hau 
long are the children away? They are away from 
log a: da tjildran a'wei? dei a: d'wei from 
home for five hours. On Sundays they are all at 
houm fo: faiv auaz. on sAndiz dei a: o:l cet 
home. In summer the children play for two hours 
houm. in SAina da tjildran plei fo: tu: auaz 
in the garden, but at half past six it is time for the 
in da ga.dn, bAt cet ha:f pa:st siks it iz taim fo: da 
children to read their school-books. Where are John 
tjildran ta ri:d dea skudbuks. hwear a: dyn 
and Helen when they read their school-books? Then 
and helin hwen dei ri:d dea skudbuks? den 
69 
Chapter Eight (8). 
they are in the house. When is it time to go to school? 
dei a: in da haus. hwen iz it taim ta gou ta sku:lf 
It is time to go to school at nine o’clock. When is it 
it iz taim ta gou ta sku:l cet nain a'khk. hwen iz it 
time to come in from the garden? It is time to come 
taim ta hm in from da ga:dn? it iz taim ta kAm 
in from the garden at half past six. What do the children 
in from da ga:dn cet ha:f pa:st siks. hwat du: da tfildran 
do when they come in from the garden? They read 
du: hwen dei kAm in from da ga:dnf dei ri:d 
their school-books. 
dea sku:lbuks. 
EXERCISE A. 
A day has twelve —. A — has also twelve hours. 
A day and a night — twenty-four hours. An hour 
has sixty —, and a minute has sixty —. On a wall in 
the house is a —. The clock has a —. On the face 
of the clock are twelve —. The clock has two —. 
The hands of the clock give the —. The short hand — 
the hours, and the long hand — the minutes. There is 
also a — small hand to give the seconds. A — is 
smaller than a clock. The day when Mrs. Smith was 
twenty-five years old was her —. John’s — is on the 
twenty-sixth of July. On his birthday, John’s parents 
— him a football. When he is fourteen, his father — 
— him a watch. 
70 
The Eighth (8th) Chapter. 
When it is John’s birthday, he will — thirteen years old. 
The children — go to school to-morrow. Helen will — 
eleven years old on her birthday. The baby-one 
year old on her birthday. Helen will be fourteen years 
old — four years. Baby will be one year old — six 
months. When the short hand is at three and the 
long hand at twelve, it is three —. When the short 
hand is at five and the long hand at eleven, it is 
five minutes — five. When the short hand is at four 
and the long hand at two, it is ten minutes — four. 
When the long hand is at nine and the short hand at 
twelve, it is a — to twelve. When the short hand is 
at one and the long hand at three, it is a — past one. 
When the long hand is at six and the short hand is — 
three and four, it is — past —. 
The children are at school — five hours. They go — 
from school — four o'clock. Their father is not — 
home when they come —. Their father — home at 
half — five. The children are — from — for five hours 
every day. Mr. Smith goes — from home at half — 
eight. How — are the children away from home? 
They are away for five —. — does Mr. Smith come 
home? He — home at half — five. — does he go 
away from home? He goes away from home- 
past eight. * — will John be fourteen years old? He 
will be fourteen — two years. When — Baby be one 
year old? She-one year old in six months. — is 
Helen’s birthday? Her birthday is — the sixteenth — 
March. — is John’s birthday? His birthday is- 
twenty-sixth — July. 
WORDS: 
o’clock 
clock 
watch 
night 
hour 
minute 
second 
give 
gave 
very 
time 
birthday 
football 
in > 
will 
be 
figure 
past 
to 
half 
quarter 
then 
between 
for 
him 
71 
Chapter Eight (8). 
home 
at home 
from 
come 
away 
fifteen 
nineteen 
twenty-four 
twenty-five 
sixty 
sixteenth 
twenty-sixth 
twenty-ninth 
thirty 
thirty-five 
— Mrs. Smith a watch? Yes, Mr. Smith — her a watch 
on her birthday. — is on the face of the clock? On 
the face of the clock are two — and twelve —. What 
time is it — the small hand is at nine and the big 
hand at three? Then it is a-nine. — time is 
it — the big hand is at five and the small hand between 
two and three? — it is-past two. What time 
is it — the big hand is at twelve and the small hand at 
six? Then it is six —. What — is it — both hands 
are at twelve? Then it is-. At what time — the 
children go to school? They go to school — nine —. 
-time do they come home? They come home — 
four —. 
EXERCISE B. 
When is John’s birthday? ... What is on the clock? ... 
What is there to give the time? ... How many minutes 
has an hour? ... How many hours are there in a day 
and a night? ... What time is it? ... Where do the 
children go at nine o’clock every day? ... When does 
Mr. Smith come home? ... How long are the children 
at school? ... How long is Mr. Smith away from home 
every day? ... When will John be thirteen years old? 
... When will Helen be fourteen? ... In how many 
months will Baby be one year old? ... Is their father 
at home when the children come from school? ... Does 
Mrs. Smith go away from home every day? ... Where 
are the hands of the clock at a quarter past five? ... 
At ten minutes to three? ... At half past ten? ... At 
twenty-five (25) minutes to eight? ... At seven o’clock? ... 
At a quarter to one? ... 
72 
Chapter Nine (9). 
The Ninth (9th) Chapter. 
THE SCHOOL 
In the school there are many rooms. There are not 
in da sku:l dear a: mcni ru:mz. dear a: not 
many rooms in Mr. Smith’s house; there are only five 
mcni ru:mz in mista smips haus; dear a: ounli faiv 
rooms in his house. The school is a very big house, 
ru:mz in hiz haus . da sku:l iz a veri big Jraus , 
and in it there are twenty (20) rooms. 
and in it dear a: twenti ru:mz. 
At nine o’clock in the morning the children come into 
a?t nain a'khk in da mo:nig da tfildran kAm inta 
the schoolroom. When all the children are in the room, 
da sku:lru:m. hwen a:l da tfildran a: in da ru:m, 
the teacher comes into the room. When he comes into 
da ti:tfa k\mz inta da ru:m. hwen hi: kAmz inta 
the room, he says, “Good morning, children! Are you 
da new, hi: see, “gud ma:nirj , tfildran! a: ju: 
all here to-day?” John says, “No, my sister is not here 
a:l hi a ta'dci?” dyn sez, “nou, mai sista iz not hia 
to-day; she is at home.” “Oh,” says the teacher, “is 
ta'dci: fi: iz cet houm.” “ou” sez da ti.tfa, “iz 
your sister ill to-day?” “Yes, my sister is ill to-day. 
jua sista il tadei?” “jes, mai sista iz il ta'dei. 
Yesterday it was cold, and she was, in the garden too 
jest ad i it wjz kould, and fi: waz in da ga:dn tu: 
teacher 
go [gou] 
goes Igoua ] 
do [du:] 
does [dAz] 
say [sei] 
says Ufs] 
I am 
you are 
he is 
she is 
it is 
we are 
you are 
they are 
John says, “I am 
a boy.” 
He says to Helen, 
“You are a girl, 
and Baby is also 
a girl,” and she 
says, “Yes, and you 
and Baby and I 
are children; we 
are children.” 
The pencil is good; 
it is good. 
John says, “You 
and Alice are girls; 
you are girls.” 
Helen and Alice 
are girls; they are 
girls. 
3/1 
73 
Chapter Nine (9). 
my 
your 
his 
her 
its 
our 
your 
their 
John says, “Helen 
is my sister.” 
“Where is your 
sister, John?” 
The girls have a 
brother; his name 
is John. 
The teacher gives 
Helen her book. 
The baby has a 
doll; its arms and 
legs are small. 
John says, “Our 
house is small.” 
“How many rooms 
has your house, 
John and Helen?” 
The house of Mr. 
and Mrs. Smith 
has five rooms; 
their house is not 
big. 
long; and to-day she is ill, she has a cold.” “Have you 
lay; and ta'dei fi: iz il, fi: hcez a kould” “hcev ju: 
also a cold, John?” “Oh no, I am not ill,” says John, 
j:Isou a kould, dyn?” “ou nou, ai cem not il,” sez dyn, 
“I am well. I was not in the garden very long. When 
“ai cem wel. ai woz not in da ga:dn veri lay. hwen 
it was too cold, I went into the house.” 
it woz tu: kould, ai went inta da haus” 
Teacher: “What does your mother say to Helen, John?” 
ti:tfa: “hwat d\z jua mAda sei ta helin, dyn ?” 
“My mother says to my sister: You are not a good girl, 
“max mxda sez ta mai sista: ju: a: njt a gud ga:l, 
Helen, when you are in the garden for so long. John 
helin, hwen ju: a: in da ga:dn fa: sou lay. dyn 
went into the house when he was too cold, and he has 
went inta da haus hwen hi: waz tu: kould, and hi: hcez 
no cold; he is not ill, he is well.” 
nou kould; hi: iz nat il, hi: iz wel ” 
“How many rooms have you in your house, John?” 
“hau meni ru:mz hcev ju: in jua haus, dyn?” 
“We have five rooms in our house.” “How many 
“wi: hcev faiv ru:mz in aua haus” “hau meni 
persons are you in your family?” “We are five persons 
pa:snz a: ju: in jua fcemili?” “wi: a: faiv pa:snz 
in our family.” “How many children are there in your 
in aua fcemili” “hau meni tfildran a: dea in jua 
family?” “There are three children in our family.” 
fcemili?” “dear a: pri: tfildran in aua fcemili” 
74 
The Ninth (9th) Chapter. 
“Who are the children in your family?” “They are my 
“hu: a: da tjildrdn in jua fcemili?” “dei a: mat 
two sisters, Helen and Alice, and I.” 
tu: sistaz, helin and celis, and ai” 
The teacher gives all the children pencils to write with. 
da ti:tfa givz a :l da tfildran pensilz ta rait wid. 
John says to the teacher, “Will you give me another 
dyn scz ta da ti:tfa, “wil jn: giv mi: a'n\da 
pencil? My pencil is not very good.” “Yes, I will 
pensil? mai pensil iz not veri gad” “jes, ai wil 
give you another pencil; here is one,” the teacher says 
giv ju: a'n\da pensil; hiar iz w\nda ti:tfa sez 
and gives him a pencil. He also gives him a pencil 
and givz him a pensil. hi: a Asou givz him a pensil 
for Helen; John will give it to her when he comes 
fa: helin; dyn wil giv it ta ha: hwen hi: k\mz 
home. 
houm . 
Has John a pencil? Yes, but it is not very good; the 
Inez dyn a pensilf jes, b\t it iz not veri gud ; da 
teacher gives him another one, and he also gives him 
ti:tja givz him a'n\da wau, and hi: dAsou givz him 
one for Helen. John says he will give her the pencil 
wah fa: helin. dyn sez hi: wil giv ha: da pensil 
one 
John has a long 
pencil; Helen has 
a short one. 
when he comes home. Are all the children at school? 
hwen hi: kAinz houm. a: a:l da tfildran cet skuAf 
No, Helen is not at school, but when she is well, she 
nou, helin iz nat cet sku:l, bAt hwen fi: iz wel, ji: 
75 
Chapter Nine (9). 
will go to school. Does the teacher give all the children 
wil gou ta sku:l. dAz da ti:tja giv a:l da tjildran 
pencils? Yes, when their pencils are not very good, or 
pensilz? jes, hwen dea pensilz a: nat veri gud, a: 
when they have no pencils, the teacher gives them 
hwen dei hoev non pensilz, da ti:tja givz dem 
pencils. What do the children say? They say, “Will 
pensilz. hwat du: da tjildran seif dei sei, “wil 
me 
you 
him 
her 
it 
us 
you 
them 
John says, “The 
teacher gives me 
a pencil.” 
The teacher says 
to John, “I will 
give you a pencil.” 
The teacher gives 
John a pencil; he 
gives him a pencil. 
He gives Helen a 
book; he gives her 
a book. 
Mr. Smith gives 
his house a name; 
he gives it a name. 
The children say 
to the teacher, 
“Will you give us 
some pencils?” 
The teacher says, 
“Yes, I will give 
you some pencils.” 
The teacher gives 
the children some 
pencils; he gives 
them some pencils. 
you give us some other pencils?” And the teacher 
jn: giv as saih \da pensilz?” and da ti.tja 
says, “Yes, I will give you some other pencils; here are 
sez, “jes, ai wil giv ju: s.\m \da pensilz; hiar a: 
some pencils for you.” 
SAin pensilz fa: ju:” 
The teacher has no book. He says to one of the 
da ti:tfa hcez nou buk. hi: sez ta w\n av da 
children, “Have you your book? Will you give it to 
tjildran, <( hcev ju: jua huh? wil ju: giv it ta 
me? I have no book to-day.” What is the colour of 
mi:? ai hcev nou buk ta'dei” hwat iz da k\la av 
ink? Its colour is blue. What is the colour of the 
irjk? its k\la iz bln:. hwat iz da Ua la av da 
walls of the room? Its walls are green. What is the 
wa:lz av da ru:m? its wa:lz a: gri:n. hwat iz da 
colour of the paper of the books? Its colour is white. 
Ua la av da peipa av da buks? its kAla iz hwait. 
What will John’s father give him on his birthday? He 
hwat wil d^anz fa:da giv him an hiz ba.pdei? hi: 
76 
The Ninth (9th) Chapter. 
will give him a watch. Will he also give Helen a 
wil giv him o wjtj. wil hi: o:lsou giv helin 3 
watch? No, he will not give her a watch. When the 
wotjf nou, hi: wil not giv ho: 3 wotf. hwen do 
I 
you 
he 
she 
it 
} play 
1 plays 
children are good, their mother gives them balls to play you \ play 
tjildron a: gnd, deo m\do givs dem bo:lz td plei they I 
with. When the children are good at school, the teacher 
wid. hwen do tjildron a: gud cet sku:l, do ti:tjo 
reads to them from his book. 
ri:ds to dem from his buk. 
Yesterday the children came to school at nine o’clock 
jestodi do tjildron keim to sku:l cet nain o'klok 
in the morning. When the children came to school 
in do mo:niy. hwen do tjildron keim. to sku:l 
yesterday, the teacher said “Good-morning” to them. 
jestodi, do ti:tfo sed “gud mo:niy 33 to dem . 
Helen’s mother said to her yesterday, “Come into the 
helins niAdo sed to ho: jestodi, “kxm into do 
house; it is too cold to play in the garden; come in, or 
haus; it is tu: kould to plei in do ga:dn; kAin in, o: 
you will be ill.” 
ju: wil bi: il 33 
Was Mr. Smith at home yesterday when the children 
wos misto smip cet houm jestodi hwen do tjildron 
came home from school? No, he was not at home. Mr. 
keim houm from sku:l? nou, hi: wos not cet houm. misto 
Smith comes home at half past five. Is Helen very ill? 
smip kAms houm cet ha:f pa:st faiv. is helin veri il? 
comes 
come 
came 
John comes 
every day. 
The children come 
every day. 
John came 
yesterday. 
The children came 
yesterday. 
says 
say 
said 
The teacher says 
“Good morning.” 
The children say 
“Good morning.” 
Yesterday the 
teacher said 
“Good morning.” 
Yesterday the 
children also said 
“Good morning.” 
come! 
Come into 
the house, 
John! 
Come into the 
house, John 
and Helen! 
77 
Chapter Nine (9). 
No, she is not very ill; she has only a cold, but she will 
nou, fi: iz not veri il; fi: hcez ounli a kould, b\t fi: wil 
be too ill for some days to go to school. Is she too ill 
bi: tu: il fa: saui deiz ta gou td sku:l. iz fi: tu: il 
to read her school-books? No, she is not too ill to read. 
td ri:d ha: sku:lbuksf nou, fi: iz not tu: il ta ri:d. 
She reads her school-books and her other books, and 
fi: ri:dz ha: sku:lbuks and ha: a da buks, and 
when John comes home with the pencil for her from 
hwen dyn kAmz houm wid da pensil fo: ha: from 
the teacher, she will also write. After some days at 
da ti:tfa, fi: wil a.lsou rait. a:fta sawi deiz cet 
home she will be well, and then she will go to school. 
houm fi: zvil bi: wel, and den fi: zvil gou ta sku:l. 
WORDS: 
I 
me 
my 
you 
your 
we 
us 
our 
them 
EXERCISE A. 
There are five — in Mr. Smith’s house. The children 
go to school at nine o’clock in the —. When all the 
children are in the schoolroom, the — comes into the 
room. When he comes, he says to the children, “— 
morning, children; are — all here?” Helen is not at 
school; she is —. John is not ill; he is —. Helen is 
ill; she has a —. The teacher gives John a pencil — 
Helen. John will give it to — when he comes home. 
When the children have no pencils, the teacher gives 
— some. The children write on paper; — colour is 
white. The children come — the schoolroom in the 
morning. 
78 
The Ninth (9th) Chapter. 
John has no pencil, but the teacher gives — one. The 
teacher says to John, “Are — ill, John?” “No,” he 
says, “—am not ill; I — well.” “How many persons 
are you in — family, John?”, “—are five persons in — 
family.” “Is — house a big one, John?” “No, — house 
is not very big; — has only five rooms.” “Will — give 
— another pencil?” “Yes, — will; here is a pencil 
for —.” ^ “What is — name, John?” “— name is John 
Smith.” What — the teacher say to the children every 
morning? He says “Good morning” to —. — is the 
name of John's family? — name is Smith. 
EXERCISE B. 
How many rooms has the school? ... When do the 
children come into the schoolroom? ... What does the 
teacher say to the children every morning? ... Is Helen 
at school to-day? ... Is John ill? ... What does Mrs. 
Smith say to Helen? ... What do the children say to 
their teacher when they have no pencils? ... And what 
does he say to them? ... When will John’s father give 
him a watch? ... Does the teacher read to the children 
at school? ... 
her 
its 
am 
came 
say 
said 
good 
ill 
well 
cold 
here 
for 
morning 
into 
room 
teacher 
twenty 
79 
Chapter Ten (10). 
The Tenth (10th) Chapter. 
farm 
THE FARM 
Mr. Smith’s brother is a farmer. 
mists smips br\dd iz d fa:ms. 
He has a farm in 
hi: hcez d fa:m in 
the country. Mr. Smith’s house is not in the country; 
ds kAntri. mists smips haus iz not in dd k\ntri; 
it is in a city. Every summer Mr. Smith and his family 
it iz in d siti. evri saws mists smip snd hiz fee mill 
go to his brother in the country for the summer-holidays. 
gou ts hiz brAds in ds kAntri fs: ds SAinshslidiz. 
In August, when the children do not go to school, it 
in s:gsst, hwen ds tjildrsn du: not gou ts sku:l, it 
is their summer-holidays. Mr. Smith’s summer-holidays 
iz drs SAinshslidiz. mists smips SAinshslidiz 
are not so long as the children’s; they are only two 
a: not sou Istj <tz ds tjildrsnz; dei a: ounli tu: 
weeks. He works more than eleven months a year 
one month’s wi:ks. hi: zvs.ks ms: dean ilevn iiiAnps s jis 
holidays 
two months’ and has two weeks’ holidays, 
holidays hcez tu: zvi:ks hslidiz. 
The children have one month’s holidays in summer, but 
ds tjildrsn heev waii mAnps hslidiz in saihs, bAt 
they do not work eleven months at school. They also 
dei du: nst ws:k i'levn mAnps eet sku:l. dei s:lsou 
have other holidays; they have two weeks’ holidays in 
hcvv a ds hslidiz; dei heev tu: un:ks hslidiz in 
The Tenth (10th) Chapter* 
December and January, two weeks’ holidays in spring, 
di'semba and d^anjuari, tu: wi:ks holidiz in sprit), 
and one week’s holidays in autumn. Mrs. Smith works 
and wAn wi:ks holidiz in o:tam. misiz smip wa:ks 
too; but she does not go away from home to work; she 
tu:; b\t fi: d\z not gou a'wei from houm ta wa:k; fi: 
works in her house. 
wa:ks in ha: haus . 
What is Mr. Smith’s brother? He is a farmer. Where 
hwot is mist a smips br\da? hi: iz a fa:ma . hwear 
is his farm? His farm is in the country. When do 
iz hiz fa:m? his fa:m iz in da k\ntri . hweti du: 
Mr. Smith and his family go to his brother’s farm? 
mist a smip and his fcemili gou ta hiz br\daz fa:m? 
They go there in summer for Mr. Smith’s holidays. Are 
dei gou dea in s\ma fo: mist a smips holidiz. a: 
Mr. Smith’s holidays as long as the children’s? No, 
mist a smips holidiz cps lot} css da tfildransf non, 
he has only two weeks’ holidays in summer; the children 
hi: haz ounli tu: wi:ks holidiz in SAtna; da tfildran 
have one month’s holidays. How many months does 
hcev w\n m\nps holidiz . hau meni m\nps d\s 
Mr. Smith work a year? He works more than eleven 
mista smip wa:k a jiaf hi: wa:ks mo: dcen i'levn 
months a year. Does he work on Sundays? No, on 
niAnps a jia. dAS hi: wa:k on SAndizf nou, on 
Sundays he does not work; Sunday is a holiday. Is 
SAndiz hi: dAS not wa:k; SAtidi iz a holidi. iz 
too = also 
She works too; 
she also works. 
’s 
s’ 
the boy's ball 
(one person) 
the boys’ ball 
(more than one 
person) 
the man’s house 
(one person) 
the men’s house 
(more than one 
person) 
81 
Chapter Ten (10). 
last year 
this year 
next year 
this 
This pencil is not 
good. 
Monday also a holiday? No, Monday is a weekday. 
m\ndi o.lsou 3 holidif nou, mxndi iz 3 wi.kdei. 
Friday is also a weekday. Thursday is a weekday too. 
fraidi iz o:lsou 3 wi:kdei. po.zdi iz 3 wi:kdei tu:. 
Wednesday is a weekday too. All the days of the week 
wenzdi iz 3 wi.kdei tu:. o:l dd deiz 3V d3 wi:k 
are weekdays, except Sunday; Sunday is a holiday. 
a: wi:kdeiz, ik'sept sAndi; SAtidi iz 3 holidi. 
Mr. Smith is at the farm every summer. He has been 
mist3 smip iz cet d3 fa:m evri s\m3. hi: hcez bi:n 
there every summer for many years. He was there 
d€3 evri SAmo jo: meni jisz. hi: wjz dee 
last summer. He will go there this summer. John 
la:st s\m3. hi: wil gou de3 dis SAmo. dyn 
is twelve years old this year. Last year he was eleven 
iz twelv ji3Z ould dis ji3. la:st ji3 hi: woz i'levn 
years old; next year he will be thirteen years old. 
jwz ould; nekst jio hi: wil bi: p3:ti:n ji3Z ould. 
Helen is ten years old this year. Last year she was nine 
helin iz ten jwz ould dis jio. la:st ji3 ji: woz nain 
years old; next year she will be eleven years old. Baby 
jioz ould; nekst jie fi: wil bi: i'levn jiez ould. beibi 
is six months old this year; last year there was no baby. 
iz siks mAnps ould dis jie; la:st jie d£3 woz nou beibi. 
John said to his teacher, “This pencil is not very good; 
dyn sed t3 hiz ti.tfo, “dis pensil iz not veri gud; 
will you give me another one?” 
wil ju: giv mi: 3 'n\do w\n?” 
82 
The Tenth (10th) Chapter. 
John and Helen have been at the farm every summer 
dyn and helin heev bi:n eet da fa:m evri sxma 
for many years. Mr. Smith has had his family with 
jo: nteni jiaz. mist a smip heez heed hiz feemili ivid 
him every year. Were Mr. Smith and his family at 
him evri jia. wa: mist a smip and hiz feemili cet 
the farm last year? Yes, they were. Do they go 
da fa:m la:st jia? jes, dei wa:. du: dei gon 
there every year? Yes, they do; Mr. Smith has been 
dea evri jia? jes, dei du:; mist a smip heez bi:n 
at the farm every summer for many years, and his wife 
cet da fa:m evri sxma jo: meni jiaz, and hiz waif 
and children have been with him. Has Mr. Smith 
and tfildran heev bi:n wid him. heez mist a smip 
had his family with him? Yes, the parents have had 
heed hiz feemili wid him? jes, da pear ants heev heed 
their children with them at the farm. Mr. Smith’s 
- dea tfildran void dem eet da fa:m. mist a smips 
brother is the uncle of John and Helen; his brother’s 
brxda iz di xrjkl av dyn and helin; hiz brxdaz 
wife is their aunt. John is the nephew of Mr. Smith’s 
zvaif iz dea a:nt. dyn iz da nevju: av mista smips 
brother, and Helen is his niece. Has John an uncle? 
hrxda, and helin iz hiz ni:s. heez dyn an xykl? 
Yes, his father’s brother, Mr. Smith, is his uncle, and 
jes, hiz fa:daz brxda, mista smip, iz hiz xykl, and 
John is his nephew. Who is Helen’s aunt? Her aunt 
dyn iz hiz nevju:. hu: iz helinz a:nt? ha: a:nt 
been 
He is, he was. he 
has been. 
They are, they 
were, they have 
been. 
had 
He has, he had, he 
has had. 
They have, they 
had, they have 
had. 
83 
Chapter Ten (10). 
COW 
is the wife of her uncle, Mr. Smith, and Helen is her 
is da waif av ha: Atjkl, mist a smip, and helm is ha: 
niece. 
ni:s. 
At the farm there are many animals. A cow is an 
cet da fa:m dear a: meni cenimals. a kau is an 
animal, and a hen is an animal. From the cows we get 
cenimal, and a hen is an cenimal . fram da kaus wi: get 
milk. From the hens we get eggs. What animals are 
milk. from da hens wi: get egs. hwat cenimals a: 
there at the farm? There are cows and hens. From 
dea cet da fa:m? dear a: kaus and hens. fram 
what animal do we get milk? We get milk from the 
hwat cenimal du: wi: get milk? wi: get milk fram da 
cow. What do we get from the hens? We get eggs from 
kau. hwat du: wi: get fram da hens? wi: get egs fram 
the hens. From where do we get fruit? We get fruit 
da hens. fram hwea du: wi: get fru:tf wi: get fru:t 
from the trees in the garden. From the milk we get 
fram da tri:s in da ga:dn. fram da milk zvi: get 
cream, and from the cream the farmer's wife makes 
kri:m, and fram da kri:m da fa.mas waif meiks 
butter. 
b\ta. 
In the morning, Mr. and Mrs. Smith drink coffee. The 
in da marniy, mist a and misis smip driyk kafi. da 
children do not drink coffee; coffee is not good for 
tfildran du: nat driyk kafi; kafi is nat gud fa: 
84 
The Tenth (10th) Chapter. 
children; they drink milk or tea. Mrs. Smith puts 
tfildran; dei driyk milk o: ti:. misiz smip puts 
cream in her coffee; Mr. Smith puts both cream and 
kri:m in ha: kofi; mista smip puts boup kri.m and 
sugar in his coffee. In England people drink much 
juga in hiz kofi. in iygland pi:pl driyk m.\tf 
tea. The English do not put cream in their tea; they 
ti:. di iyglif du: not put kri:m in dea ti:; dei 
put milk in their tea. When John comes home from 
put milk in dea ti:. hwen dyn k\mz houm from 
school, he puts his books away in his room. 
sku:l, hi: puts hiz buks a'wei in hiz ru:m. 
What do Mr. and Mrs. Smith drink in the morning? 
hwot du: mista and misiz smip driyk in da mo.niy? 
They drink coffee. Who makes the coffee? Mrs. Smith 
dei driyk kofi. hu: meiks da kofi? misiz smip 
makes it. What do they put in their coffee? Mr. Smith 
meiks it. hwot du: dei put in dea kofi? mista smip 
puts both cream and sugar in his coffee, but Mrs. Smith 
puts boup kri:m and Juga in hiz kofi, bAt misiz smip 
puts only cream in her coffee. What do the English 
puts ounli kri:m in ha: kofi. hwot du: di iyglif 
put in their tea? They put milk in their tea. Do the 
put in dea ti:? dei put milk in dea ti:. du: da 
children drink coffee? No, they do not drink coffee; 
tfildran driyk kofi? nou, dei du: not driyk kofi; 
coffee is not good for children. They get tea or milk 
kofi iz not gud fo: tfildran. dei get ti: o: milk 
get 
gets 
I get 
you get 
he gets 
she gets 
it gets 
we get 
you get 
they get 
makes? 
does.... make? 
Who makes the 
coffee? 
Does Mrs. Smith 
make the coffee? 
egg 
85 
Chapter Ten (10). 
to drink. Who makes the butter at the farm? The 
ta driyk. hu: meiks da bxta cet da fa:mf da 
farmer’s wife makes it. From what does she make it? 
fa: mas waif meiks it. from hwjt (Ias fi: meik it? 
She makes it from cream. Where does she get the 
fi: meiks it from kri:m. hwea d\z fi: get da 
cream from? She gets it from the milk. 
kri:m from? fi: gets it from da milk. 
WORDS: 
farmer 
farm 
holiday 
work 
too 
this 
next 
uncle 
aunt 
nephew 
niece 
animal 
cow 
hen 
get 
milk 
cream 
EXERCISE A. 
Mr. Smith’s brother is a —. He lives at a — in the —. 
Mr. Smith’s house is in*-. In August, it is the 
children’s —. Mr. Smith’s — are not so long as the 
children’s. The children have one — holidays every sum¬ 
mer. Mr. Smith has only two — holidays. Mr. Smith 
— more than eleven months — year. Mrs. Smith 
works —; she works in-. Sunday is a —. People 
do not work on holidays, but only on —. Mr. — holi¬ 
days are in August. The — holidays are also in 
August. The — name is John. The — names are 
Helen and Alice. Mr. Smith has — at the farm every 
summer for many years. He has — his family with 
him every year. Helen is ten — old. — year she will 
be eleven years old. — year there was no baby. 
Mr. Smith’s brother is the children’s uncle; his wife 
is their —. John is their —, and Helen is their —. 
There are many — at the farm. Cows and hens are —. 
From the cows we — milk, and from the hens we get —. 
86 
The Tenth (10th) Chapter. 
We get — from the milk, and from the cream the 
farmer’s wife — butter. The children — tea or milk 
in the morning, but Mr. and Mrs. Smith — coffee. 
Mr. Smith — both cream and sugar in his coffee, but 
Mrs. Smith — only cream in her coffee. 
Where does John — his books? He — them in his 
room. Who — the coffee in the morning? Mr. — 
wife makes it. —the children drink coffee or tea? They 
— not drink coffee; they — tea or milk. — do we get 
milk from? We get it from the —. Where — we — 
eggs from? We get eggs from the —. — are cows 
and hens? They are —. Is Helen ten years •—? 
Yes, — year she is ten years old, but — year she will — 
eleven years old. 
butter 
egg 
make 
drink 
coffee 
tea 
put 
sugar 
had 
been 
EXERCISE B. 
What is Mr. Smith’s brother? ... Where is his farm? ... 
Where is Mr. Smith’s house? ... Is Saturday a holi¬ 
day? ... Does Mrs. Smith work too? ... Where does 
she work? .. . Does Mr. Smith go to his brother’s 
farm every year? ... Has his family been with him 
every year? ... Who is John’s uncle? ... Who is his 
aunt? ... What do we get from the cows? ... Where 
do we get eggs from? ... Who makes the butter at the 
farm? ... What does she make it from? ... What do 
the English put in their tea? ... What do the children 
drink? ... 
87 
Chapter Eleven (11). 
The Eleventh (11th) Chapter. 
THE LAKE 
shall 
will 
I shall 
you will 
he will 
she will 
it will 
we shall 
you will 
they will 
One day at the farm Mr. Smith said to his brother 
wah dei cat da fa:m mist a smip sed ta his brxda 
George, “To-day I shall go to the lake with the children.” 
dy’.d^, “ta'dei ai feel gou ta da leik wid da tfildran.” 
“Yes,” said his brother, “it will be good for them.” 
“jes” sed his brAda, “it wil bi: gud fa: dem.” 
The lake is only small. It is near the farm; it is only 
da leik iz ounli smo.l. it iz nia da fa:rn; it iz ounli 
five minutes from the farm to the lake. The farm is 
faiv minits from da fa:m ta da leik. da fa:m iz 
not near the city; it is two hours from the city to the 
not nia da siti; it iz tu: auaz from da siti ta da 
farm. The lake is not far from the farm; it is near 
fa:m. da leik iz not fa: from da farm; it iz nia 
the farm. The farm is far from the city; it is not near 
da fa:m. da fa:m iz fa: from da siti; it iz not nia 
the city. England is far from Sweden, but England is 
da siti. ifjgland iz fa: from swi:dn, bAt iygland iz 
near France. 
nia fra: ns. 
Between the farm and the lake there are fields. In 
bi'twi:n da fa:m and da leik dear a: fi:ldz. in 
some fields there is grass, and in other fields there is 
SAin fi.ldz dear iz gra:s, and in Ada fi:ldz dear iz 
The Eleventh (11th) Chapter. 
com. In summer the animals are in the fields; there 
ko:n. in samo di cenimalz a: in dd fi:ldz; dedr 
are cows in the fields, and there are also horses in the 
a: kauz in dd fi:ldz, dnd dedr a: o.lsou ho:siz in dd 
fields. The cows and the horses eat the grass in the 
fi:ldz. dd kauz dnd dd ho:siz i:t dd gra:s in dd 
fields. When the cows eat much grass, they give good 
fi:ldz. hiven dd kauz i:t m\tj gra:$, dei giv gud 
milk. The hens eat grass too, and we eat the hens’ eggs. 
milk. dd henz i:t gra:s tu:, dnd wi: i:t dd henz egz. 
The hens also eat corn. When the hens get much corn 
dd henz o.lsou i:t ko:n. hwen dd henz get m.\tf ko:n 
to eat, we get many eggs. 
tu i:t , wi: get meni egz . 
Where is the lake? The lake is near the farm. Is the 
hwedr iz dd leik? dd leik iz nid dd fa:m. iz dd 
farm near the city? No, the farm is not near the city; 
fa:m nid dd siti? nou, dd fa:m iz not nid dd siti; 
it is far from the city. Is England far from France? 
it iz fa: from dd siti. iz iy gland fa: from fra:ns? 
No, England is near France. What is between the lake 
nou, iy gland iz nid fra:ns. hwot iz bi'twi:n dd leik 
and the farm? There are fields between the lake and 
and da fa:m? dear a: fi:ldz bi'twi.n da leik and 
the farm. What animals are there in the fields? There 
da fa:m. hwot cenimalz a: dea in da fi.ldzf dear 
are cows and horses in the fields. What do they eat? 
a: kauz and ho.siz in da fi:ldz. hwot du: dei i:t? 
89 
Chapter Eleven (11). 
how? 
how many? 
how long? 
How do we swim? 
We swim with our 
arms and legs. 
How many horses 
are there at the 
farm? 
There are four 
horses at the 
farm. 
How long have 
you walked? 
I have walked for 
ten minutes. 
They eat the grass in the fields. 
bei i:t bd gra:s in bd fi:ldz. 
There is a road from the farm to the lake. There is 
bear iz d roud from bd fa:m to bd leik. beor iz 
also a road from the city to the farm. The road from 
o:lsoud roud from bd siti td bd fa:m. bd roud from 
the farm to the lake is short. It goes through the fields. 
bd fa:m td bd leik iz fo:t. it gouz pru: bd fi:ldz. 
The children go through the door of the house into the 
bd tjildrdn gou pru: bd do: ev bd haus intd bd 
garden. Does the road go through the farm? No, one 
ga:dn. d\z bd roud gou pru: bd fa:m? nou,WAn 
road goes to the farm from the city, and another road 
roud gouz td bd fa:m from bd siti, dnd d'nAbd roud 
goes from the farm to the lake. What does the road 
gouz from bd fa:m td bd leik . hwot dAz bd roud 
to the lake go through? It goes through the fields. 
td bd leik gou pru:? it gouz pru: bd fi:ldz. 
How do the children get from the house into the garden? 
hau du: bd tjildrdn get from bd haus intd bd ga:dn? 
They go through the door; but sometimes John goes 
bei gou pru: bd do:; bAt SAmtaimz dyn gouz 
through the window. How do they get from the farm 
pru: bd windou. hau du: bei get from bd fa:m 
to the lake? They go by the road through the fields. 
td bd leik? bei gou bai bd roud pru: bd fi:ldz. 
How do Mr. Smith and his family get from the farm 
hau du: imsto smip ond hiz fcemili get from bd fa:m 
90 
The Eleventh (11th) Chapter. 
to the city? They go by the road to the city. There 
to dd sitif dei gou bai dd roud td dd siti. dedr 
is water in the lake. In summer the water is warm. 
is wo:td in dd leik. in SAind dd wo:td is wo :m. 
In winter it is cold, and sometimes there is ice on the 
in zvintd it iz kould, dnd SAmtaimz dedr iz ais on dd 
lake. But when it is summer, the water is warm. When 
leik. bAt hwen it iz SAmd, dd wo:td iz wo:m. hwen 
the children are very warm, they drink cold water, but 
dd tjildrdn a: veri wo:m, dei driyk kould wo:td, bAt 
the water in the lake is not good to drink. Mr. Smith 
dd wo:td in dd leik iz not gud td dritjk. mistd smip 
takes his children with him to the lake. John takes a 
tciks hiz tjildrdn wid him td dd leik. dyn teiks d 
ball with him to play with in the water, and Helen 
bo: l wid him td plei wid in do wo:td, dnd helin 
takes her doll with her. 
teiks hd: dol wid hd:. 
What is in the lake? There is water in the lake. Do 
hwot iz in dd leikf dedr iz wo:td in dd leik. du: 
the children drink the water of the lake? No, they 
dd tjildrdn drirjk dd wo:td dv dd leikf nou, dei 
do not, but the horses and the cows do. What is on thTe 
du: not, bAt dd ho:siz dnd dd kauz du:. hwot iz on dd 
lake in winter? Sometimes there is ice on the lake in 
leik in wintdf SAmtaimz dedr iz ais on dd leik in 
winter. Does Mr. Smith take his children with him to 
wintd. dAZ mistd smip teik hiz tjildrdn wid him td 
91 
Chapter Eleven (11). 
-ed 
He learns, he 
learned, he has 
learned. 
They learn, they 
learned, they have 
learned. 
the lake? Yes, he takes them with him. Does he take 
da leik? jes, hi: teiks dem wid him. d\z hi: teik 
his brother with him? No, his brother has no time 
hiz hr Ada wid him? nou, hiz hr\dd h<zz nou taim 
to go to the lake; he works every day in summer, 
td gou td da leik; hi: wa:ks evri dei in SAma, 
except on Sundays. What do the children take with 
ik'sept an SAndiz. hwat du: da tjildran teik wid 
them to play with? John takes his ball, and Helen 
dem ta plei wid? dyn teiks hiz ba:l, and helin 
takes her doll. Does Helen take her doll with her into 
teiks ha: dal . dAZ helin teik ha: dal wid ha: inta 
the water? No, it is not good for her doll to get into 
da wa:ta? nou, it iz nat gud fa: ha: dal ta get inta 
the water. What do Mr. Smith and the children do at 
da wa:ta. hwat du: mist a smip and da tjildran du: cet 
the lake? They swim in the water. Do they all swim? 
da leik? dei swim in da wa:ta. du: dei a:l swim? 
Yes, they all swim, except Baby, but Helen is not a very 
jes, dei a:l swim, ik'sept beibi, bAt helin iz nat a veri 
good swimmer; she has learned to swim this summer. 
gud swima; fi: hcez la:nd ta swim dis SAma. 
Has John learned to swim this summer, too? No, he 
hcez dyn la:nd ta swim dis SAma, tu:? nou, hi: 
learned to swim last summer, and he is a very good 
la:nd ta swim la:st SAma, and hi: iz a veri gud 
swimmer. Is the water warm enough to swim in? 
swima. iz da wa:ta wa:m i'nAf ta swim in? 
92 
The Eleventh (11th) Chapter. 
Yes, in August it is warm enough, but in spring it is 
jes, in o:gast it is wo:m in\f, b\t in sprig it is 
not warm enough; it is too cold in spring to swim in. 
not wo:m tn\f; it is tu: kould in sprig ta swim in. 
Is the baby big enough to learn to swim? No, she is 
is da beibi big fn\f ta la:n ta swim? nou, ji: is 
too small to learn to swim. 
tu: smo:l ta lain ta swim. 
This morning John asked his father, “Father, when 
dis mo: nig dyn a:skt his fa: da, (C fa:da, hwen 
will you take us to the lake?” “I shall take you there 
wil ju: teik as ta da leik?” “ai fed teik ju: dea 
to-day,” his father answered. “Will you come with us, 
ta'dei” his fa.da arnsad. “wil ju: kAin wid as, 
George?” he asked his brother. “No,” the farmer 
dy:d$?” hi: u:skt his brAda. “nou” da fa.rna 
answered, “I have no time to-day, but ask me on 
(i.nsad. “ai hcev nou taim ta'dei, bAt a:sk mi: on 
Sunday, and I shall answer ‘yes’.” 
SAiidi, and ai feel a:nsa *jes 9 .” 
John has asked his father every day for a week, “Will 
dyn hces a:skt his fa:da ezri dei fo: a wi:k , “zvil 
you take us to the lake to-day?” and every day his father 
ju: teik as ta da leik ta'dei?” and evri dei his fa:da 
has answered, “No, not to-day;” but this morning his 
lues a:nsad, “non, not ta'deibAt dis mo:nig his 
father answered, “Yes, to-day we shall all go to the 
fa:da a.nsad, t( jes, ta'dei wi: feel o:l gou ta da 
-ed 
He asks, he asked, 
he has asked. 
They ask, they 
asked, they have 
asked. 
-ed 
He answers, he 
answered, he has 
answered. 
They answer, they 
answered, they 
have answered. 
-ed 
He walks, he 
walked, he has 
walked. 
They walk, they 
walked, they have 
walked. 
93 
Chapter Eleven (11). 
lake.” The children and their father will walk to the 
leik. 33 da tfildran and dea fa:da wil wa:k ta da 
lake. What is “to walk”? To walk is to go on foot. 
leik. hwat iz “ta wa:k 33 ? ta wa:k iz ta gou an fut. 
The baby does not walk; she is not big enough to walk; 
da beibi dxz nat wa:k; fi: iz nat big i'nxf ta wa:k; 
town = city 
but her father takes her on his arm. 
bxt ha: fa:da teiks ha: an hiz a:m. 
Yesterday the children walked for two hours through 
jestadi da tfildran wa:kt fa: tu: auaz pru: 
the fields. How long has John walked to-day? He 
da fi:ldz. hau lay hcez dyn wa:kt ta'dei? hi: 
has walked for only ten minutes to-day, five minutes 
hcez wa:kt fa: ounli ten minits ta'dei, faiv minits 
to the lake and five minutes back to the house. After 
ta da leik and faiv minits bcek ta da haus. a:fta 
the summer-holidays the family will go back to town 
da sxmahalidiz da fcemili wil gou bcek ta taun 
(to the city), and the children will go back to school. 
(ta da siti), and da tfildran .wil gou bcek ta sku:l. 
When will they go back to town? They will go back 
hwen ivil del gou bcek ta taun? dei wil gou bcek 
to the city in August. 
ta da siti in a:gast. 
What does Mr. Smith say to his brother? He says, 
hwat dxz mista smip sei ta hiz brxdaf hi: sez, 
“Come with us to the lake to-day, George!” And what 
“kxm wid xs ta da leik ta'dei, d^a:d^! 33 and hwat 
94 
The Eleventh (11th) Chapter. 
does his brother answer? He answers, “Not to-day, 
d\z hiz br\dd a:nsdf hi: a:nsaz, “not ta'dei, 
but ask me on Sunday, and I shall answer ‘yes’.” 
b\t a:sk mi: on SAndi, and ai feel a:ns3 *jes 9 .” 
What does John ask his father? He asks, “Will you 
hwot d\z d$on a:sk hiz fa:ddf hi: a:sks, “wil ju: 
take us to the lake to-day?” And what does his father 
teik as td da leik ta'dei f” and hwot dAZ hiz fa:da 
answer? He answers, “Yes, go and take your ball and 
a:nsaf hi: a:nsaz, “jes, gou and teik jua bo:l and 
your doll. To-day we shall all go to the lake and 
jua dol. ta'dei wi: feel o:l gou ta da leik and 
swim.” 
swim” 
EXERCISE A. 
The animals of the farm drink —. The water is in 
a —. In winter there is — on the lake. The lake 
is — the farm. The farm is — from the city. There 
are — between the lake and the farm. In some fields 
there is —, and in other fields there is —. There are 
cows and — in the fields. The animals — the grass 
in the fields. From the farm to the lake there is a —. 
The road goes — the fields. To — is to go on foot. In 
winter there is — ice on the lake, but not every day. 
John — his ball with him to the lake, and Helen — her 
doll. — do Mr. Smith and his children do at the lake? 
They — in the water of the lake. — John learned to 
WORDS: 
lake 
near 
far 
field 
corn 
horse 
eat 
road 
through 
by 
town 
sometimes 
95 
Chapter Eleven (11). 
water 
ice 
take 
swim 
swimmer 
enough 
ask 
answer 
walk 
back 
how? 
get 
shall 
swim? Yes, he learned-last summer; he is a very 
good —. Is the baby big — to swim? No, she is 
— small to swim. — do the children get from the 
house into the garden? They go — the door. — do 
they get from the farm to the lake? They — by the 
road to the lake. “When will you take us to the lake?” 
John — his father. “I — take you there to-day; to-day 
I have time,” his father —. 
EXERCISE B. 
Who drinks the water in the lake? ... What is on the 
lake sometimes in winter? ... Is the lake far from the 
farm? ... Is the farm far from the city? ... How do 
they get from the farm to the lake? ... Does the baby 
walk? ... What animals are in the fields? ... What does 
the road to the lake go through? ... What is there in 
the fields? ... Do all the children swim in the lake? ... 
What do the children take with them to the lake? ... 
How does Mr. Smith take the baby to the lake? ... Is 
it warm enough in spring to swim in the lake? ... Is 
Helen a good swimmer? ... 
Has Helen learned to swim this year? ... Has John asked 
his father before to-day to take them to the lake? ... 
What does Mr. Smith’s brother answer, when Mr. Smith 
asks him, “Will you come with Us to the lake?” ... How 
long has John walked to-day? ... When will the family 
go back to town? ... How far is it from the farm to the 
lake? ... How far is it from the farm to the city?... 
Chapter Twelve (12). 
The Twelfth (12th) Chapter. 
MEALS 
In England most people have three meals every day. 
in it/gland moust pi:pi hcev pri: mi:lz evri dei. 
We also eat three meals a day. The first meal of the 
wi: 'd:Isou i:t pri: mi:lz a dei. da fa:st mi:l av da 
day we call breakfast. In England people eat much 
dei wi: ko:l brekfast. in it/gland pi:pl i:t mAtj 
bread 
more for breakfast than in other countries. In many 
mo: jo: brekfast dcen in \da k\ntriz. in meni 
countries people have only bread and butter with coffee 
k\ntriz pi:pi hcev ounli bred and b\ta wid kofi 
or tea, but in England they have fish, eggs and bacon, 
o: ti:, bAt in it/gland dei hcev fij, egz and beikan, 
and sometimes porridge, too, for breakfast. After this, 
and SAmtaimz porid$, tu: } fo: brekfast. a:fta dis, 
they have tea or coffee with bread and butter. Some- 
dei hcev ti: o: kofi wid bred and bAta. SAm- 
porridge 
times they put marmalade on their bread and butter. 
taimz dei put ma.maleid on dea bred and bAta. 
We make marmalade from one of the fruits. 
wi: meik ma.rnaleid from WAn av da fru.ts. 
The next meal of the day is lunch, at one o’clock. Some 
da nekst mi:l av da dei iz lAnf, cet wau a'klok. SAm 
people eat lunch at noon (twelve o’clock). For lunch 
pi:pl i:t L\nf cet nu:n (twelv a'klok). fo: lAnf 
97 
Chapter Twelve (12). 
most English people eat some meat and vegetables. The 
moust it/glif pi:pi i:t saw mi:t and vedytablz. da 
bacon 
meat of cows is beef. Vegetables are plants. A potato 
mi:t dv kauz iz bi:f. vedytzblz a: pla:nts. 3 pa'teitou 
is a vegetable; a carrot is a vegetable. At seven o’clock 
iz a vedytabl; a karat iz a ved^itabl. at sevn a'khk 
we have dinner. Dinner is the biggest meal of the 
wi: hav dina. dina is da bigist mi:l av da 
one potato 
two potatoes 
day. For dinner most people have meat and vegetables 
dei. fa: dina moust pi:pi hav mi:t and vedytablz 
first. After the meat they sometimes have fruit. 
fa:st. a:fta da mi:t dei SAmtaimz hav fru:t. 
-AH 
How many meals do we eat a day? We eat three meals 
hau mem mi:lz du: wi: i:t a dei? wi: i:t pri: mi:lz 
carror^]^ 
a day, but some people also drink tea between the meals. 
a dei, bAt SAm pi:pi a:lsou drirjk ti: bi'twi:n da mi:lz. 
What are the three big meals of the day? They are 
hwat a: da pri: big mi:lz av da deif dei a: 
breakfast in the morning, lunch at noon or at one o’clock, 
brekfast in da ma:niy, /am/ at nu:n a: at WAn a'khk, 
and dinner in the evening at seven o’clock. Do all 
and dina in di i:vnirj at sevn a'khk. du: o:l 
people have dinner in the evening? No, some people 
pi:pi hav dina in di i:vniyf nou, saw pi: pi 
( < 2 ]) 
have dinner at one o’clock, and then they call the 
hav dina at WAn a'khk, arid den dei ko:l di 
potato 
evening meal supper. For supper people have bread 
i'.vnivj mi:l SApa. fa: sApa pi: pi hav bred 
98 
The Twelfth (12th) Chapter. 
and butter, sometimes with cold meat. 
and b\ta, s \rntaimz wid kould mi:t. 
What are vegetables? Vegetables are plants; potatoes 
hwat a: vedytablz? vedytablz a: pla:nts; pa'teitouz 
and carrots are vegetables. Food is what we eat. Meat 
and karats a: ved^itablz. fu:d iz hwot wi: i:t. mi:t 
is food, bread is food, everything we eat is food. A 
iz fu:d, bred iz fu:d, cvripiy id: i:t iz fu:d. a 
tree is a thing; a house is a thing. A man is not a 
tri: iz a piy; a bans iz a pirj. a man iz not a 
thing, a man is a person. A boy is not a thing, a boy 
piy, a man iz a pa:sn. a bai iz not a pig, a bai 
is a person, too. 
iz a pa:sn, tu:. 
When it was time to have a meal, the mother went to 
hwen it waz taim ta hav a mi:l, da m\da went ta 
the door and called, “John and Helen, where are you? 
da da: and ka:ld, C( dyn and helin, hwear a: ju:f 
Come in, it is dinner-time.” But the children were not 
k \iri in, it iz dinataim” b\t da tfildran wa: not 
in the garden. The mother called again, “John and 
in da ga:dn. da m\da ka:ld a'gein, “dyn and 
Helen — it is dinner-time!” 
helin — it iz dinataim /” 
She went back into the house again and said to her 
fi: went bak inta da haus a'gein and sed ta ha: 
husband, “Allan, will you go out into the fields and see 
liAzband, u alan, wil ju: gou aut inta da firldz and si: 
what? 
what 
What does he say? 
I take what you 
give me. 
What we eat is 
food. 
Chapter Twelve (12). 
where the children are? It is dinner-time. They do 
hwea da tjildran a:? it iz dinataim. dei du: 
not hear me when I call. I have called three times. 
rut hid mi: hwen ai ko:l. ai hcev ko:ld pri: taim 2 . 
They are not good children; every day at lunch-time 
dei a: not gud tjildran; evri dei cet l ah ft aim 
do 
dyes 
did 
The teacher does 
not see the child¬ 
ren every day. 
The children 
do not go to 
school every day. 
He did not see 
them yesterday. 
They did not go to 
school yesterday. 
and dinner-time, they are not here and do not hear me.” 
and dinataim , dei a: not hia and du: not Jtia mi:” 
Mr. Smith went out, but when he came back, the 
mista smip went aut, b\t hwen hi: keim bcek, da 
children were not with him. “I called many times, but 
tjildran wa: not zvid him. (( ai ko.ld meni taimz, b\t 
they were not there.” “Oh, where are the children?” 
dei zva: not dea” “ou, hwear a: da tjildran?” 
the mother said and went into the house — and there 
da MAda sed and went inta da haus — and dea 
were the children! 
zva: da tjildran! 
They had been in their rooms in the house when their 
dei heed bi:n in dea ru:mz in da haus hwen dea 
mother called. “Have you called, father and mother?” 
m\da ko.ld. “hcev ju: ko:ld, fa: da and m\da?” 
they asked. What did the mother go out into the 
dei a:skt. hwot did da m\da gou aut inta da 
garden for? She went out to call the children. Did 
ga:dn fo:f ji: went aut ta ko:l da tjildran. did 
had been 
He had been. 
They had been. 
100 
she see them? No, she did not see them, they were 
ji: si: ' deni? nou. Ji: did not si: dem, dei wa: 
The Twelfth (12th) Chapter. 
not there. What did the mother do when she did 
not dea. hwot did da niAda du: hwen fi: did 
not see the children? She said to the father, “Will 
not si: dd tjildran? fi: sed ta da fa:da, “wil 
you go out into the fields and call the children?” 
ju: gou aut inta da fi.ldz and ko:l da tjildran?” 
Did the children hear their parents call them? No, 
did da tjildran hia dea pear ants ko:l demt nou, 
they did not. Where had the children been? They 
dev did not. hwea heed da tfildran bi:nt dei 
had been in their rooms. How many meals a day do 
heed bi:n in dea ru:mz. hau meni mi.lz a dei du: 
most people have? They have three meals a day. 
moust pi:pl hcev? dei hcev pri: mi.lz a dei. 
What is food? Everything we eat is food. Bread is 
hwot iz fu:df evripirj wi: i:t iz fu:d. bred iz 
food; meat is food. Is a man a thing? No, a man 
fu:d; mi:t iz fu:d. iz a mcen a piy? nou, a mcen 
is not a thing, a man is a person. When do people 
iz not a piy, a mcen iz a pa:sn. hwen du: pi:pi 
have tea? Oh, some have tea many times a day. 
hcev ti:f ou, s\m hcev ti: meni taimz a dei. 
Most people have tea in the afternoon at four o’clock 
moust pi:pl hcev ti: in di a:fta'nu:n cet fo: a'klok 
or five o’clock (at tea-time). Some people have coffee 
o: faiv e'khk (cet ti:taim). s\m pi:pi hcev kofi 
after lunch and after dinner. 
a:fta l\nj and a:fta dina. 
sun 
101 
Chapter Twelve (12). 
bed 
comes? 
does ... come? 
What comes? 
Who comes? 
Does the man 
come? 
do you have? 
have you? 
Do you have 
dinner at seven 
o’clock? 
I do not have 
dinner at seven 
o’clock. 
Have you walked 
to the lake? 
I have not walked 
•to the lake. 
When is it morning? It is morning from the time the 
hwen is it mo:my? it is mo:niy from do taim do 
sun is up till (until) noon. When is noon? Noon is 
SAti is Ap til (ay? til) nu:n. hwen is nu:n? nu:n is 
at twelve o’clock. When is the afternoon? The after- 
cet twelv o'klok. hwen is di a:fto'nu:n? di a:fto- 
noon is from lunch-time until tea-time. What do we 
'nu:n is from lAnftaim \ritil ti:taim. hwot du: wi: 
call the time after tea-time? The time after tea-time 
ko:l do taim a:ftd ti:taim? dd taim a:ftd ti:taim 
we call the evening. What comes after the evening? 
wi: ko:l di i:vniy. hwot kwms a:ftd di i:vniy? 
After the evening comes the night. At night people 
a:ftd di i:vniy kwms dd naif. cet nait pi: pi 
sleep. They sleep in beds. The children go to bed at 
sli:p. dei sli:p in beds. dd tjildrdn gon to‘bed (et 
eight o’clock in the evening. Then their mother puts 
eit d'khk in di i:vniy. den dro mAdd puts 
them to bed and says, “Good night, John and Helen, 
dem td bed end ses, “gud nait , dyn end helm . 
sleep well!” The parents do not go to bed till eleven 
sli:p well” de prevents du: not gou to bed til i'levn 
o’clock. 
e'klok. 
What do John and Helen have for breakfast? Some- 
hwot du: dyn end helin hcev fo: brekfost? s\m- 
times they have porridge and milk for breakfast. Do 
taims dei hcev porid$ dnd milk fo: brekfost. du: 
102 
The Twelfth (12th) Chapter. 
the children have coffee in the afternoon? No, they 
da tjildrdn hcev kofi in di a:fta'nu:nf non, dei 
do not, but sometimes, when they come from school 
du: njt, b\t s/untaims, hzven dei k\m from sku:l 
in the afternoon, they have^tea with bread and butter. 
in di a:fta'nu:n, dei hcev ti: und bred and b\ta. 
EXERCISE A. 
We have three big — a day. The first meal of the day 
is —. Some people have — in the morning with — 
and butter, and the children sometimes have — and 
milk. The English eat more for — than most people; 
they have — and eggs, and sometimes —. They drink 
tea and have bread and butter with —. At one o’clock 
people have —. In some countries most people — bread 
and butter for lunch, but in England many people 
have — and — for lunch. 
— and — are vegetables. The third big meal of the 
day is —. For dinner we have — and vegetables. The 
meat of cows is —. At twelve o’clock it is —. The 
time between lunch-time and tea-time is the —. Some¬ 
times people have dinner at one o’clock, and then they 
call the meal at seven o’clock —. The time after tea- 
time is the —. — is what we eat. A tree is a —, 
and a house is also a —, but a man is not a —; a man 
is a person. 
When did the mother — the children? The mother 
went to the door and — John and Helen before dinner. 
Did the children — their mother call? No, the children 
WORDS: 
breakfast 
meal 
bread 
fish 
bacon 
porridge 
marmalade 
lunch 
vegetable 
potato 
carrot 
dinner 
meat 
beef 
supper 
food 
everything 
thing 
103 
Chapter Twelve (12). 
call 
hear 
again 
see 
evening 
noon 
did 
afternoon 
sleep 
bed 
till 
until 
out 
sun 
up 
did not — their mother call. What — the mother do, 
when the children did not come? When they did not 
come, she went into the house — and said to her hus¬ 
band, “I do not — the children. Will you go — and 
see — they are?” — do the children go to bed? The 
children go to — at eight o’clock. — puts the children 
to bed? Their mother puts them to bed and says, 
“Good night, children, — well!” — do the parents 
go to bed? The parents do not go to bed — eleven 
o'clock. 
EXERCISE B. 
How many meals do most people have a day? ... What 
are the three big meals of the day? ... What do they 
have in England for breakfast? ... What do people in 
some other countries have for breakfast? ... What do 
English people have for lunch? ... What do we call 
potatoes and carrots? ... Do all people have dinner at 
seven o’clock? ... Are trees and houses things or per¬ 
sons? . . . Where had the children been when their 
mother called them? ... What did they say when they 
came from their rooms? ... When is the afternoon? ... 
What do we call the time after tea-time? ... When do 
the children go to bed? ... 
104 
Chapter Thirteen (13). 
The Thirteenth (13th) Chapter. 
LANGUAGES 
English is a language, Swedish is a language, and 
iyglif iz a Iceygwid 3, swi:dif iz a Iceygwid 3, and 
French is a language. English, Swedish, and French 
frenj is a Iceygwid 3. iyglifswi:di{, and frenf 
are languages. The people in England speak the English 
a: Iceygwidyz. da pi:pi in iygland spi:k di iyglif 
language; they speak English. The people in Sweden 
Iceygzvid 3; dei spi:k iyglif. da pi: pi in swi:dn 
speak the Swedish language; they speak Swedish. The 
spi:k da swi:dif Iceygwid 3; dei spi:k swi:dij. da 
people in France speak the French language; they speak 
pi:pi in frct:n£ spi:k da frenf iceygwid 3; dei spi:k 
French. A language has many words. “Man” is a 
frenf. a Iceygwid 3 hcez meni wa:dz. “mcen” iz a 
word; “go” is a word. The word “read” has four 
iva:d; “gou” iz a zva:d. da wa:d “ri:d” hcez fa: 
letters: r-e-a-d; “r” is a letter; tf e” is a letter; “a” is 
let as: a:-i:-ei-di:; “a:” iz a let a: “i:” iz a let a; “ei” iz 
a letter; “d” is a letter. 
a leta ; “di:” iz a let a. 
What language do people speak in Norway? In Norway 
hzvat Iceygwid 3 du: pi:pi spi:k in na:weif in na:wei 
they speak Norwegian. Where do they speak the 
dei spi:k na:'wi:d^an. hwea du: dei spi:k di 
2/1 
105 
Chapter Thirteen (13). 
The English 
alphabet: 
a [ei] 
b [bi:] 
c [ii:] 
d [di:] 
e [i:] 
f [ef] 
g 
h [eitf ] 
i [ at] 
j [dpi] 
k [kei] 
1 [el] 
m [em] 
n [en] 
o [ou] 
P [pi:] 
q [kju:] 
r [a:] 
s [«] 
t [ti:] 
u [ju: ] 
V [vi:] 
w [dAbl ju: 
x [ eks ] 
y [ wai ] 
z \sed] 
English language? They speak the English language 
iijglif Icnjgwid$? dei spi:k di irjglif Icpygwid^ 
in many countries, for example: in England, in North 
in meni kxntriz, fdr ig'za:mpl: in iygland , in no:p 
America, and in Australia. How many words has the 
a'merikd, and in D.'streiljd. hau meni iva:dz hcez di 
English language? They say it has 250,000 (two hundred 
iijglij Iccijgzvid^f dei sei it Inez tu: JiAndrid 
and fifty thousand) words. How many letters are 
and fifti pauzand zva:dz. hau meni letaz a: 
there in the word “woman”? There are five letters 
dea in da zva:d “zvuman”? dear a: faiv letaz 
in the word “woman”. 
in da wa:d “zvuman”. 
How many letters has the alphabet? The English 
hau meni letaz hcez di celfabit? di iyglif 
alphabet has twenty-six ( 26 ) letters. Some alphabets 
celfabit hcez twentfsiks letaz. s\m celfabits 
have more than twenty-six letters. 
hcev ma: dcen tzventi'siks letaz. 
Can the children in the Swedish schools speak English? 
keen da tfildran in da szvi:dif sku:lz spi:k iyglij? 
No, not the small children, but the big children learn 
nou, not da smo:l tfildran, bAt da big tfildran lain 
to speak English. Can John speak Danish? No, the 
ta spi:k iyglif. keen dyn spi:k deiniff non, da 
children in England cannot speak Danish; they do 
cannot = can not tfildran in iygland kcenot spi:k deinif; dei du: 
106 
The Thirteenth (13th) Chapter. 
not learn to speak Danish in the English schools. 
not la:n ta spi:k deinij in di iyglif sku:lz. 
Can the baby walk? No, she cannot walk, she is not 
keen da beibi wo:k? nou, fi: kcenot wo:k, ji: iz not 
big enough to walk. The mother says that she cannot 
big tn\f ta wo:k. da mAda sez dat ji: kcenot 
see the children; the mother says, “I cannot see the 
si: da tfildran; da mAda sez, “ai kcenot si: da 
children.” The father says that they are in the fields; 
tfildran” da fa:da sez dat dei a: in da fi:ldz; 
he says, “They are in the fields.” John said that lie 
hi: sez, <( dei a: in da fi:ldz” dyn sed dat hi: 
had been in his room; John said, “I have been in my 
heed bi:n in hiz ru:m; dyn sed, “ai hcev bi:n in mai 
room.” 
ru:m” 
Some words say that a person or a thing does or is 
sam wa:dz sei dat a pa:sn o: a pig dAZ o: iz 
something, for example: The man goes; the house is in 
SAmpirj, jar ig l za:mpl: da meen gouz; da haus iz in 
the garden; the mother makes the food; the children 
da ga:dn; da mAda meiks da fu:d; da tfildran 
play in the garden. The words we have here we call 
plei in da ga:dn. da wa:dz wi: hcev hia wi: ko:l 
“verbs”. The words “go”, “play”, “make” are verbs. 
“va:bz”. da wa:dz “gou”, “plei”, “meik” a: ve:bz. 
Are there other verbs? Yes, there are many other 
a: dee Ada va:bzf jes, dear a: meni Ada 
4/2 
107 
Chapter Thirteen (13). 
this 
these 
This boy is 
English. 
These children are 
English. 
everything 
something 
Can you say 
everything in 
English? 
No, but now I can 
say something in 
English. 
verbs. There is a word for everything we do, and 
vd:bz. dear iz a zva:d fa: evripiy wi: duand 
these words we 
call “verbs”. 
“Give” 
is 
an English 
di:z zva:dz wi: 
ka:l “va:bz”. 
“gw” 
iz 
an iygli / 
verb; this verb 
is English. 
“Give” and 
“take” are 
va:b; dis va:b 
iz iyglif . 
“giv” 
and 
“teik” A: 
English verbs; these verbs are 
English. 
iyglif va:bz: 
di:z va:bz a: 
iyglif. 
We shall now write some of the English verbs we have 
zvi: feel nan rait saju av di iyglif va:bz wi: hepv 
learned till now: I learn, they call, he plays, we ask, 
la:nd til nan: ai h:n, dei ka:l, hi: pleiz, wi: a:s/c, 
you answer, she has, and many others. All these verbs 
ju: a:nsd, fi: Inez, and meni Adas. a:l di:z va:bz 
say that a person does or is something at this time, 
sei dat a pa:sn d\z a: iz s.unpiy <et dis taim, 
to-day, or now. But when we say: I learned, they have 
ta'dei, a: nan. b \t hwen wi: sei: ai la:nd, dei hcev 
called, he played, we have asked, you answered, she 
ka:ld, hi: plcid, zvi: hcev. a:skt, ju: a:nsad, fi: 
had, we do not say that the persons do something now, 
herd, zvi: du: not sei dat da pa:snz du: s\mpiy nan, 
at this time, but at another time, a time before now: 
cet dis taim, b\t cet a'n\da taim, a taim bi'fa: nau: 
we asked her yesterday; last year they were at the 
wi: a:sht Jia: jest ad i; la:st jia dei wa: cet da 
farm. In most of these verbs we put -ed after the word 
fa :m. m in oust av ‘ di:z * va:bz wi: put i:di: a:fta da wa:d 
108 
The Thirteenth (13th) Chapter. 
when the time is not now, but a time before now. 
Invert dd taim iz rut nan, b\t j taint bi'fj: nan. 
But in some of the verbs we do not put -ed after the 
b\t in saw dv do vd'.bz wi: du: lut put i:di: a:ftj dd 
word; we say: I give to-day, but: I gave yesterday. We 
wd:d; wi: sei: ai giv td'dei, b\t: ai geiv jcstddi. wi: 
also say: I have learned to read at school, but: I have 
j'.lsou sei: ai hcev h:nd td ri:d cut sku:l, b\t: ai hcev 
given her the pencil. I take the book now. I took the 
givj^ lid: dd pensil. ai teik dd buk nan. ai tuk dd 
book yesterday. I have taken the book home with me. 
buk jcstddi. ai hcev teikn dd buk houm wid mi:. 
What does John do in the morning? He goes to school 
hzvjt d\z dyn du: in dd mj'.niyf hi: gouz td sku.l 
in the morning. What did John do yesterday? He went 
in dd nu:nirj. hwjt did dyn du: jestddi? hi: went 
to school yesterday. What has John done for seven 
td sku:l jestddi. hwot hcez dyn dAn fo: sevn 
years? He has gone to school for seven years. 
jidz? hi: hcez gm td sku:l fo: sevn jidz. 
I see the children in the garden. I also saw them there 
ai si: dd tjildrdn in dd ga:dn. ai o:lsou sj: dem ded 
yesterday. I have seen them there every day. 
jestddi. ai hcev si:n dent ded evri dei. 
John hears mother call him now. He heard mother call 
dyn hidz mAdd ko:l him nau. hi: hd:d mxdd ki:l 
him before. He has not heard mother call. 
him bi'fj:. hi: hcez not hd.d mAdd kj:l. 
109 
Chapter Thirteen (13). 
They put their books in their rooms now. They put their 
bei put be a buks in bed ru:mz nau. dei put be a 
books in their rooms yesterday. They have put their 
buks in bed ru:mz jestddi. bei hcev put be a 
books in their rooms every day this week. 
buks in be a ru:mz evri dei bis wi:k. 
Mother makes the food to-day. Aunt Gwen made the 
mAba meiks ba fu:d ta'dei. a:nt gwen meid ba 
tea yesterday. Helen has not made the tea. 
ti: jestadi. helin hcez not meid ba ti:. 
Baby sleeps in Helen’s room now. Baby slept in her 
beibi sli:ps in helinz ru:m nan. beibi slept in ha: 
mother’s room till she was six months old. Baby has 
niAbaz ru:m til ji: waz siks iinxnps ould. beibi hcez 
slept in Helen’s room for twelve days. 
slept in helinz ru:m fa: twelv deiz. 
We eat three meals a day. John ate a pear yesterday. 
wi: i:t pri: mi:lz a dei. dyn et a pea jestadi. 
Helen has not eaten all her apples. 
helin hcez nat i:tn a:l ha: ceplz. 
Helen says something to her father now. She said 
helin sez s.vmpiij ta ha: fa:ba nau. fi: sed 
something to him yesterday. Has mother said “Good 
SAinphj ta him jestadi. hcez niAba sed (C gud 
night” to you? 
nait” ta ju:f 
Helen swims very well now. John swam in the lake 
helin swnnz veri ivel nau. dyn swcern in ba leik 
110 
The Thirteenth (13th) Chapter. 
yesterday. He has swum many times in thfe lake. 
jestddi. hi: hcez swaui meni taimz in dd leik. 
The cows drink the water of the lake. John drank 
dd kauz driyk dd wo:td dv dd leik. dyn drceyk 
milk yesterday. Baby has not drunk her milk. 
milk jestddi. beibi hcez tut drAijk hd: milk. 
I read a book every week. I read a book yesterday. I 
ai ri:d d buk evri wi:k. ai red d buk jestddi. ai 
have read this book many times. 
hcev red dis buk meni taimz. 
John writes to his uncle every month. He wrote to his 
dyn raits td hiz Aykl evri niAnp. hi: rout td hiz 
uncle yesterday. He has written many times to his uncle. 
Af/kl jestddi. hi: hcez ritn meni taimz td hiz a ykl. 
John can read books now. He could not read when he was 
dyn keen ri:d buks nau. hi: kud not ri:d hwen hi: woz 
five years old. He has been able to read for six years. 
faiv jidz ould. hi: hcez bi:n eibl td ri:d fo: siks jidz. 
We say: I am able to, or I can. I was able to, or I could. 
wi: sei: ai cent eibl td, o: ai keen, ai woz eibl td, o: ai kud. 
But we can only say: I have been able to. You are able 
b\t wi: keen ounli sei: ai hcev bi:n eibl td. ju: a: eibl 
to, or you can. You were able to, or you could. You 
td, d: ju: keen, ju: zvd: eibl td, j: ju: kud. ju: 
have been able to. He is able to, or he can. He was 
hcev bi:n eibl td. hi- iz eibl td, j: hi: keen, hi: wdz 
able to, or he could. He has been able to. When you 
eibl td, j: hi: kud. hi: hcez bi:n eibl td. hwen ju: 
111 
Chapter Thirteen (13). 
have read all these verbs many times, you will have 
hcev red a:l di:z va:bz meni taimz, ju: mil hcev 
learned them. 
h:nd dew. 
What is a verb? A verb is a word. What does a verb 
hwat iz a va:bf a vd:b iz a ma:d. hwot d\z a Vd:b 
say? A verb says what a person or a thing does or is. 
seif a vd:b sez hzvjt d pa:sn a: d pig d\z o: iz. 
Which of these words: “The father gives John a foot- 
hwitf dv di:z wd:dz: “dd fa:da givz dyn a fut- 
ball”, is a verb? The word “gives” is a verb; when 
ba:l”, iz a va:b? da wa:d “givz” iz a va:b; hwen 
we ask, “What does the father do?” we answer, “He 
mi: a: sky “hwat dAZ da fa: da du:f” wi: a: ns a, “hi: 
gives.” Which of these words: “John was in the garden”, 
givz” limitf av di:z wa:dz: “dyn maz in da ga.dn”, 
is a verb? The word “was” is a verb. What do we put 
iz a va:b? da wa:d “maz” iz a va:b. hmat du: mi: put 
after most English verbs when it is not now that we do 
a:fta moust iyglif va:bz hwen it iz nat nau datwi: du: 
something, but at a time before now? We put the letters 
SAmpiy, b\t cet a tairn bi'fa: nau? mi: put da letaz 
-ed after the word. We have had some of these verbs. 
i:di: a:fta da zva:d. wi: hcev heed saw, av. di:z va:bz. 
The word “learn” is one of these verbs; we say: I learn 
da wa:d “la:n” iz mAn av di:z va:bz; wi: set: oi la:n 
English now, I learned some English words yesterday, 
iyglif nau, ai la:nd s\m iyglif wa:dz jestadi, 
112 
The Thirteenth (13th) Chapter. 
but I have not learned enough English words. 
bAt ai hoev not h:nd i'nAf iyglif zva:dz. 
Have we had others of these verbs? Yes, we have 
hoev zvi: had Addz av di:z va:bzf jcs, zvi: hcev 
other 
others 
Have we had 
other verbs? 
Yes, we have had 
others. 
learned some others: “call”, “play”, “ask”, “answer”, 
la:nd saih Adaz: “kill”, “plei”, “a:sk”, “a:nsa”, 
and “walk”; after all these verbs we put the letters -ed 
and “zva:k”; ci.fta a:l di:z va:bz zvi: put da letaz i:di: 
when we speak of a time before now. Do all verbs take 
hzven zvi: spi:k av a taim bifo: nau. du: j :1 va:bz teik 
-ed? No, we have also learned some other verbs, for 
i:di:f non, zvi: hoev a:lsou larnd SAm Ada va:bz, far 
example: “give”, “take”; these verbs do not take the -ed. 
ig'za:mpl: “giv”, “teik”; di:z va:bz du: not teik di i:di:. 
EXERCISE A. 
French is a —, and English is also a —. In England 
people — the English language, and in Sweden they — 
Swedish. “Man” and “book” are —. There are three 
— in the word “man”. There are twenty-six letters 
in the English —, but in other — there are more —. 
The big children in the Swedish schools can speak 
English, but in the English schools the children — speak 
Swedish. John says — he can swim. Helen says — 
she is not a good swimmer. I gave" her the pencil; 
I have — her the pencil. He takes the book to-day; 
he — the book yesterday; he has — the book many 
times. Helen has — to school for five years. 
113 
Chapter Thirteen (13). 
WORDS: 
Verbs say what a person or a thing does, — example: 
language 
speak 
word 
letter 
alphabet 
can 
cannot 
could 
able to 
that 
something 
example 
verb 
these 
north 
fifty 
hundred 
thousand 
given 
took 
taken 
gone 
done 
saw 
seen 
said 
heard 
put 
made 
slept 
ate 
eaten 
swam 
swum 
drank 
drunk 
The man goes. The words “play”, “walk”, “learn” we 
call —. In — three verbs we put -ed after the word 
when we speak of a tim'e before —. 
What — John do yesterday morning? He — to school. 
What has Helen — for five years? She has — to school 
for five years. John asks Helen, “Have you seen my 
book?” and she —, “No, I have not — it to-day, but I 
— it yesterday.” Had John and Helen — their mother 
call them? No, but they — her when they came from 
their rooms. Where does John — his books when 
he comes home from school? He — them in his room. 
He — them there yesterday, and he has — them there 
every day. Who — the food? Mother — it. Who 
— the tea yesterday? Aunt Gwen — it. Has Helen — 
the tea? No, she has not — it. 
Where — people sleep? They sleep in —. — Helen 
sleep last night? Yes, she — last night. — the baby 
slept in John’s room? No, but she has — in Helen’s 
room for twelve days. What — the children have for 
breakfast? They — porridge. Did they — porridge 
yesterday? No, yesterday they — bread and butter. 
Has Baby — bread for breakfast, too? No, she has — 
milk. — John and Helen swim in the lake every day? 
No, but they — there yesterday, and they have — there 
many times this summer. Has John — the book his 
father gave him? Yes, he read it yesterday, and Helen 
will — it now. 
What — John write with at school? He — with pen 
and ink, but when he was small, he — with a pencil. 
114 
The Thirteenth (13th) Chapter. 
Has Helen — with pen and ink? Yes, but when she was 
small, she — not — with pen and ink. Can Helen 
swim? Yes, but last year she — not swim. Has John 
been — to swim for many years? No, he has only — 
able — swim for two years. 
read 
wrote 
written 
now 
twenty-six 
time 
America 
Australia 
EXERCISE B. 
What language do they speak in England? ... What 
language do they speak in Norway? ... How many 
letters has the word “■write”? ... What is a verb? ... 
Can you write some of the verbs we have learned? ... 
Were you able to write them last year? ... Who took 
the children to the lake? ... What do we put after the 
verbs “call”, “learn”, “walk”, “ask”, “answer” when we 
speak of some time before now? ... 
115 
Chapter Fourteen (14). 
The Fourteenth (14th) Chapter. 
this 
that 
This book (here) 
is my book. 
That book (there) 
is your book. 
chair 
MR. SMITH’S HOUSE 
Mr. Smith has a house with five rooms. In one of the 
mistd smip hcez a haus wid faiv ru:mz. in w\n av da 
rooms the family have their meals; that is the dining-room. 
ru:mz da fee mil i hcev dea mi:\z; deet iz da dainiyru.m. 
They have their dinner in the dining-room; they dine 
dei hcev dea dina in da daimyrunn; dei dain 
in the dining-room. After dinner they go into another 
in da dainitjru:m. a:fta dina dei gou intu a'nxda 
room; that is the sitting-room. Here they sit in big 
ru:m; deet iz da sititjru:m. hia dei sit in big 
chairs and read their books in the evenings. There is 
tjeaz and ri:d dea buks in di i:vniyz. dear iz 
also a kitchen in the house. The kitchen is the room 
a: Ison a kit fan in da haus. da kit fan iz da ru:m 
where Mrs. Smith makes the food. 
hwea misiz smip meiks da fu:d. 
How many rooms are there in Mr. Smith’s house? There 
hau meni ru:mz a: dea in mist a smips haus? dear 
are five rooms in it. Where do the family have their 
a: faiv ru:mz in it. hwea du: da feemili hcev dea 
meals? They have their meals in the dining-room. Into 
mi'Azf dei hcev dea mi:lz in da dainirjru:m. inta 
which of the rooms do the family go after dinner? 
hwitf av da ru:mz du: da feemili gou a:fta dinaf 
116 
The Fourteenth (14th) Chapter. 
After dinner they go into the sitting-room. What is 
a:ftd dina dei gou inta da sitiyru:m. hwot is 
the kitchen? That is the room where Mrs. Smith 
da kitjan? dcet is da ru:m hwea misiz smip 
makes the food. What is in the sitting-room? In the 
meiks da fu:d. hwot is in da sitiyru:m\? in da 
sitting-room there are some big chairs and two small 
sititjru:m dear a: s\m big tjeas and tu: smo:l 
tables. Are there chairs in the dining-room, too? Yes, 
teibls. a: dea tfeas in da dainirjru:m, tu:? jes, 
but the chairs in the dining-room are not so big. Is 
b\t da tjeas in da dainirjru:m a: not sou big. iz 
there a table? Yes, the family have their meals at a 
dea a teibl? jes, da fcemili hcev dea mi:lz cet a 
large table in the dining-room. 
la:d% teibl in da dainitjru:m. 
Every room in Mr. Smith's house has four walls at the 
evri ru:m in mist a smips haus hces fo: wo:lz cet da 
sides, a ceiling at the top, and a floor to walk on. From 
saidz, a si:liy cet da top, and a flo: ta wo:k on. from 
the ceiling of the room hangs a lamp. The lamp gives 
da si:lit) av da ru:m hcerjz a lamp. da lamp givz 
light in the room in the evenings so that people can 
lait in da ru:m in di i:vniyz sou dat pi:pi keen 
read. In the day it is light, but at night it is dark. 
ri:d. in da dei it is lait, b\t cet nait it is da:k. 
People cannot read when it is dark. There are chairs 
pi:pl kcenot ri:d hwen it iz da:k. dear a: tfeaz 
table 
large = big 
lamp 
light 
light 
The light of the 
lamp makes the 
room light. 
117 
Chapter Fourteen (14). 
and a table on the floor of the dining-room. Mr. 
and a teibl on da flo: av da dainirjru:m. mist a 
Smith’s house has two gardens, one at the front and 
smips haus hces tu: ga:dns, wah cet da frAnt and 
another at the back of the house. When we come 
a'nAda cet da book av da haus. hwen wi: kAin 
through the front garden into the house, we first come 
pru: da frAnt ga:dn into da haus, wi: fa:st kAm 
into the hall. In the hall people hang their hats and 
into da ho:l. in da ho: l pi: pi hcey dea hoots and 
coats when they come in through the door. The 
bouts hwen dei kA m in pru: da do:. da 
second floor] 
first 99 
ground ” 
i 
EB 
BIB 
which of? 
which? 
On which of 
the floors is 
Helen’s room? 
= On which 
floor is Helen’s 
room? 
dining-room, the sitting-room, the kitchen, and the hall 
dainiyru:m, da sitiyru:m, da kit fan, and da ho:l 
are all on the ground floor of the house. On the first 
a: o:l on da ground flo: av da haus. on da fa:st 
floor of the house there are three bedrooms. Mr. and 
flo: av da haus dear a: pri: bedru.nis. mist a and 
Mrs. Smith sleep in one bedroom, John sleeps in 
misis smip sli:p in WAn bedru:m, dyn sli:ps in 
another bedroom, and Helen and Baby sleep in a third 
a'nAda bedru:m, and helin and beibi sli:p in a pa:d 
bedroom. 
bedru'.m. 
On which of the floors is the dining-room? The 
on Invitf av da flo:s is da dainiyru:mf da 
dining-room is on the ground floor. *On which floor is 
dainiyru'.m is on da ground flo:. on hwitf flo: is 
118 
The Fourteenth (14th) Chapter. 
Helen's and Baby's bedroom? It is on the first floor. 
helinz and bcibis bcdru.m? it iz on 3d fa:st fh:. 
How do we get from the ground floor to the first floor? 
hau du: wi: get from 3d ground fh: to 3d foist fh:? 
We go up the stairs to get to the first floor. On which 
wi: gou Ap 3d steas to get ta da fa:st fh:. on hivitf 
floor is John’s room at school? His room at school is 
fh: is dyns ru:m cet sku:l? his ru:m cet sku:l is 
on the second floor. The school is a big house; it has 
on 3a sekand fh:. da sku:l is a big haus; it hccs 
a ground floor, a first, and a second floor. In some 
d ground fh:, a fa:st, and a sekand flo:. in saiii 
schoolrooms there are many chairs and tables, one for 
sku:lru:ms dear a: weni tfeas and teiblz, w\n fo: 
each of the children. Each of the children in John’s 
i:tf av da tfildran. i:tf av da tfildran in dyns 
school has a small table and a chair. Not every child 
sku:l hccs a smo:l teibl and a tfea. not evri tfaild 
has a table and a chair; Baby has not a table and a 
hccs a teibl and a tfea; beibi hccs not a teibl and a 
chair; but each of the children in John's school has. 
tfea; bAt i:tf av da tfildran in dyns sku:l hccs. 
Has each of the persons in the Smith family a room? 
hccs i:tf av da pa:sns in da smip fcemili a ru:m? 
No, not each of the persons, only John has his own 
nou, not i:tf av da pa:sns, ounli dyn hccs his oun 
room. Helen does not sleep alone in her room; she and 
ru:m. helin dAS not sli:p a'loun in ha: ru:m; ji: and 
stairs 
every 
each 
Every child has 
two arms. 
Each of the 
children in the 
school has a 
pencil. 
119 
Chapter Fourteen (14). 
bathroom 
bath [ba:p] 
baths [ba:8z] 
mouth [maup] 
mouths [mauffz] 
wash-basin 
Baby sleep in one room; they sleep together. Mr. and 
beibi sli:p in wah ru:m; dei sli:p ta'geda. mistd dnd 
Mrs. Smith also sleep in one room. John and Helen 
misiz smip o:lsou sli:p in w\n ru:m. dyn and helin 
go to school together in the morning. Helen does not 
gou ta sku:l ta'geda in da mo:niij. helin d\z not 
go alone; she goes together with John. Baby does not 
gou a'loun; fi: gouz ta'geda zvid dyn. • beibi dAz not 
sleep alone; she sleeps together with Helen; but John 
sli:p a'loun; fi: sli:ps ta'geda zvid helin; bAt dyn 
sleeps alone in his own room. 
sli:ps a'loun in hiz oun ru:m. 
How many rooms are there on the first floor of the 
hau meni ru:mz a: dee on da fa:st flo: av da 
house? There are three bedrooms and a bathroom. 
hausf dear a: pri: bedru:mz and a ba:pru:m. 
Every morning Mr. Smith takes a cold shower in the 
evri mo:nig mista smip teiks a kould faua in da 
bathroom. Mrs. Smith and the children do not take 
ba:pru:m. misiz smip and da tfildran du: not teik 
cold showers, they take hot baths in the bath-tub every 
kould fauaz, dei teik hot ba:dz in da ba:ptAb evri 
night before they go to bed. When they take hot baths, 
nait bi'fo: dei gou ta bed. Jizven dei teik hot ba:dz, 
they have hot water in the bath-tub. Hot water is very 
dei hcev hot zvo:ta in da ba:ptAb. hot zvo:ta iz veri 
warm water. Before the meals the children wash their 
zvo:m zvo:ta. bi'fo: da mi:lz da tfildran zvof dea 
120 
The Fourteenth (14th) Chapter. 
hands in the wash-basin. Their hands are very dirty 
hcendz in da wafbeisn. dea hcendz a: veri da:ti 
when they come in from their play in the garden, but 
hwen del k\tn in from dea plei in da ga.dn, b\t 
when they have washed themselves, their hands are 
hwen dei hcev ivaft dam'selvz, dea hcendz u: 
clean. They put hot water in the wash-basin and wash 
kli:n. dei put hat wa:ta in da wajbeisn and waj 
their hands with soap. “Soap and water are good things 
dea hcendz wid soup. (C soup and wa:ta a: gud piyz 
for dirty hands,” Mrs. Smith says to her children. Baby 
fa: da:ti hcendz” niisiz smip scz ta Jia: tfildran. beibi 
cannot wash herself; she is too small; but John washes 
ktenat waf ha'self; fi: iz tit: sma:l; b\t dyn wajiz 
himself. Helen can wash herself, too; she is big enough 
him'self. helin keen waf lia:'self, tu:; fi: iz big i'nxf 
for that now. John and Helen both wash themselves. 
fa: deet mu. dyn and helin boup waf dam'selvz. 
EXERCISE A. 
We have our meals in the —. We have dinner in the 
dining-room, or we — in the dining-room. After dinner 
Mr. Smith and his family go into the —. In the sitting- 
room they — in big chairs. There are big — and 
small — in the sitting-room. Mrs. Smith makes the 
food in the —. At the top of the room is the —. From 
himself 
herself 
themselves 
John washes 
himself. 
Helen washes 
herself. 
John and Helen 
wash themselves. 
121 
Chapter Fourteen (14). 
WORDS: 
dining-room 
that 
dine 
sitting-room 
sit 
chair 
kitchen 
large 
table 
ceiling 
floor 
ground floor 
lamp 
hang 
light 
dark 
hall 
coat 
hat 
up 
bedroom 
stairs 
each 
together 
alone 
own 
soap 
bath 
shower 
bathroom 
hot 
bath-tub 
wash 
wash-basin 
dirty 
the ceiling of the room — a lamp. The lamp gives — 
in the room at night. In the day it is —, but at night 
it is —. The lamp gives — in the room when it is —. 
We walk on the — of the room. On the floor of the 
room there are chairs and —. There are two floors 
in Mr. Smith’s house; on the-are two large rooms, 
a dining-room and a —; on the-are three bed¬ 
rooms and a —. Helen and Baby sleep in one —, and 
John sleeps in another —. We go — the — to get to 
the first floor. When Mr. Smith comes home, he hangs 
his — and his — in the hall. 
— of the children in the school has a pencil. There 
is a table and a chair for — of the children in John’s 
school. Has — child a pencil? No, not — child has 
a pencil, but — of the children in the school has a 
pencil. Has — of the persons in Mr. Smith’s family 
a room? No, only John has his — room. Has Helen 
not her — room? No, Helen and Baby sleep —. Does 
John sleep —? * Yes, he sleeps — in his own room. 
Does Mrs. Smith take a cold — in the morning? No, 
Mrs. Smith and the children do not take cold —; they 
take hot baths in the —. — do we call very warm 
water? We call it — water. Where do the children 
— their hands before the meals? They wash their 
hands in the —. Are their hands dirty or — when 
they come in from their — in the garden? Their 
hands are —. What — the children wash their hands 
with? They wash their hands with — and hot —. 
Can the baby wash —? No, the baby cannot wash 
herself, but John and Helen wash —. Does Mr. Smith 
122 
The Fourteenth (14th) Chapter. 
wash —? Yes, Mr. Smith washes —, and Mrs. Smith 
also washes —. — is the kitchen? The — is the 
room where Mrs. Smith makes the —. 
clean 
play 
herself 
himself 
themselves 
EXERCISE B. 
In which of the rooms do we have our meals? ... Where 
do we sleep at night? ... Where does Mrs. Smith make 
the food? ... What do the family sit in in the sitting- 
room? ... Where does Mr. Smith hang his hat and 
coat? ... Has Helen her own bedroom? ... Has each 
of the persons in the family a room? ... Has every 
child a pencil? ... On which floor is the sitting-room? 
... Where are the bedrooms? ... What hangs from the 
ceiling of the sitting-room? ... Do Helen and John sleep 
in their own rooms? ... Does the baby sleep alone? ... 
How do we get light when it is too dark to read? ... 
123 
Chapter Fifteen (15). 
The Fifteenth (15th) Chapter. 
skates 
little = small 
WINTER 
One day this winter John and his friend George went 
zvAn dei dis wintd dyn dnd his frend dy:d$ zvent 
out together. John has many friends, but his best 
aut ta'geda. dyn has meni frends, bAt his best 
friend is George. They go to school together in the 
frend is dy:d$. dei gou ta sku:l ta'geda in da 
morning, and they play together in the afternoon. John 
mo:niy, and dei plei ta'geda in di a:fta'nu:n. dyn 
and Helen are good friends, too; but sometimes he is 
and helin a: gud frends, ta:; b\t sAintaims hi: is 
not good to her, and then they are not friends. 
not gud ta ha:, and den dei a: not frends. 
George is the son of Mr. Smith’s neighbour, Mr. Green. 
dy:d 3 is da sah av mist a smips neiba, mist a gri:n. 
Mr. Green’s house is next to Mr. Smith’s house, and 
mist a gri:ns haus is nekst ta mist a smips herns, and 
the two men are neighbours. John’s room is next to 
da tu: men a: neibas. dyns ru:m is nekst ta 
Helen’s and Baby’s room, and the bathroom is next to 
helins and beibis ru:m, and da ba:pru:m is nekst ta 
Mr. and Mrs. Smith’s room. The other day the two 
mista and misis smips ru:m. di Ada dei da tu: 
boys walked to a little lake near their homes. They 
hois zvo:kt tu a litl leik nia dea houms. dei 
124 
The Fifteenth (15th) Chapter. 
had their skates with them. John’s skates were old, 
heed dea skeits wid dem. dynz skeits wd: ould, 
but George’s skates were new. John got his skates 
b\t dy.dyz skeits Wd: nju:. dyn got hiz skeits 
two years ago; they are old now; but George got his 
tn: jiaz a'gou; dei a: ould nau; b\t dy:d$ got hiz 
skates only three days ago; they are new. 
skeits ounli pri: deiz d'gou; dei a: nju:. 
What is the name of Mr. Smith’s neighbour? It is 
hwot iz do neim ov mist a smips neibaf it iz 
Mr. Green. Why do we call him Mr. Smith’s neigh- 
mista grim. hum du: wi: ko:l him mista smips nei- 
bour? Because he lives in the first house after that 
ba? bi'koz hi: livz in da fa:st haus a:fta deet 
of Mr. Smith. Has Mr. Smith more than one neigh- 
av mista smip. hcez mista smip mo: deen WAn nei- 
bour? Yes, he has two; the man in the house before 
ba? jes, hi: hcez tu:; da mcen in da haus bi'fo: 
that of Mr. Smith is also his neighbour. Why did 
deet 3V mista smip iz o:lsou hiz neiba. hwai did 
George get skates? Because it was Christmas. When 
dy.d^ get skeits? bi'koz it woz krismas. hwen 
is Christmas? Christmas Day is the twenty-fifth (25th) 
iz krismas? krismas dei iz da twenti'fifp 
of December. Are John’s skates new or old? They 
av di'semba. a: dynz skeits nju: o: ould? dei 
are old. Are George’s skates also old? No, they are 
a: ould. a: dy.dyz skeits o:lsou ould? nou, dei a: 
John gets tea 
every day. 
John got tea 
yesterdey. 
John has got tea 
the last five years. 
(He gets, he got, 
he has got.) 
that of 
Mr. Green’s house 
is larger than that 
of Mr. Smith = 
Mr. Green’s house 
is larger than Mr. 
Smith’s house. 
why? 
because 
Why do we call 
him Mr. Smith’s 
neighbour? 
Because he lives 
in the next house. 
125 
Chapter Fifteen (15). 
nothing — no 
thing 
He will, he would. 
He lets, he let, he 
has let. 
One inch = 2.54 
centimetres. 
He faUs, he fell, 
he has fallen. 
new; he has had them only three days. 
nju:; hi: hcez had dem ounli pri: deiz. 
In summer the weather is warm, but in winter the 
in SAmd dd wedd iz wo:m, h\t in ivinto dd 
weather is cold. The weather had been very cold 
wedd iz kould. dd wedd heed hi:n veri kould 
for the last two days. Then John said to his friend 
fo: dd la:st tu: deiz. den dyn sed td hiz frend 
George in the morning, “Now there is ice on the water. 
dy: d$ in dd mo:niy, “nau dedr iz ais on dd wo:td. 
Let us go out and skate on the lake to-day.” He said 
let as gou aut dnd skeit on dd leik td'dei . 33 hi: sed 
nothing to his mother. She would not have let him 
nApiy td hiz mAdd. fi: wud not hcev let him 
go. She would have said to him, “John, do not go 
gou. fi: wud hcev sed to? him, “dyn, du: not gou 
and skate to-day, or you will go through the ice. The 
dnd skeit td'dei, o: ju: wil gou pru: di ais. di 
ice is not thick enough. In two days the ice will be 
ais iz not pik i'n\f. in tu: deiz di ais wil bi: 
one or two inches thick, and then you can skate on it. 
w\n o: tu: infiz pik, dnd den ju: keen skeit on it. 
To-day the ice is too thin, only half an inch thick, so 
td'dei di ais iz tu: pin, ounli ha:f dn inf pik, sou 
that you will go through it and fall into the water.” 
dot ju: u’il gou pru: it dnd fo:l intd dd wo.td.” 
John did not put on enough clothes; he did not put on 
dyn did not put on i'nAf kloudz; hi: did not put on 
126 
The Fifteenth (ISth) Chapter. 
his coat. Hats and coats are clothes. In the morning 
hiz kout. hats and kouts a: kloudz. in da ma:niy 
people put on their clothes, and in the evening before 
pi:pi put an dea kloudz, and in di i:vniy bi'fa: 
they go to bed, they take them off again. When you 
dei gou ta bed, dei teik dem a:f a'gein. hzven ju: 
go out, you put on your hat and coat, and when you 
gou aut, ju: put an jua hat and kout, and hwen ju: 
come home, you take them off again. 
kAm houm. ju: teik dem a:f a'gein. 
When the two boys came to the lake, they put on their 
hwen da tit: baiz keini ta da leik, dei put an dea 
skates and went out on the ice. When they had skated 
skeits and went aut an di ais. hwen dei had skeitid 
for some time, John fell through the ice into the water. 
fa: s\m taim, dyn fel pru: di ais inta da wa:ta. 
When he came out again, he was wet and cold. He 
hwen hi: keim aut a'gein, hi: waz zvet and kould. hi: 
went home at once. When he got home, his mother 
went houm at w\ns. hzven hi: gat houm, hiz m\da 
said, “Your clothes are wet. You must have fallen 
sed, “jua kloudz a: wet. ju: mASt hav fa:ln 
into the water. You must go to bed at once, or you 
inta da wa:ta. ju: mASt gou ta bed at WAns, a: ju: 
will get a cold.” 
zvil get a kould . 33 
John's mother said that he must go to bed at once; 
dynz mAda sed dat hi: mAst gou ta bed at wahs; 
He must = he 
has to; 
he must = he 
had to; 
he has had to. 
127 
Chapter Fifteen (IS). 
I dry; 
he dries, he dried, 
he has dried. 
that is, he had to go to bed, not in two or three minutes, 
deet iz, hi: heed, td gou ta bed, not in tu: o: pri: minits, 
but now, at once. Would John's mother have let him 
b\t nau, eet WAns. wud dynz mxda hcev let him 
go to the lake? No, she would have said to him, “You 
gou ta da leik? nou, fi: zvud hcev sed ta him, “ju: 
must not go there to-day, you must play here.” Must 
m\st not gou dea ta'dei, ju: m\st plei hia” m\st 
the children go to school every day? (Do the children 
da tjildran gou ta sku:l evri dei? (du: da tfildran 
have to go to school every day?) Yes, they must (or 
hcev ta gou ta sku:l evri dei?) jes, dei m\st (o: 
“have to”) go to school every day. Why did John fall 
“hcev ta”) gou ta skn:l evri dei. hwai did d$on fo:l 
through the ice into the water? Because the ice was 
pru: di ais inta da wo:ta? bi-koz di ais woz 
too thin. Were John's clothes dry when he came out 
tu: pin. wa: dynz kloudz drai hwen hi: keim aut 
of the water? No, they were very wet; his mother 
av da wo:ta? nou, dei wa: veri wet; hiz m\da 
had to dry them for him. If you go out in wet weather, 
heed ta drai dem fo: him. if ju: gou aut in wet weda, 
it will make your clothes wet. Then you must d iry 
it wil meik jua kloudz wet. den ju: mAst drai 
them when you get home, and they will be dry again. 
dem hwen ju: get houm, and dei wil bi: drai a'gein. 
How long had the weather been cold? The weather had 
hau log heed da iveda bi:n kould? da weda heed 
128 
The Fifteenth (15th) Chapter. 
been cold for two days. Did John tell his mother that 
bi:n kould fo: tu: deiz. did dyn tel hiz mAda dat 
he would go to the lake? No, he did not tell his 
hi: wud gou ta da leikf nou, hi: did not tel hiz 
mother. Would his mother have let him go if he had 
mAda. wud hiz m\da hcev let him gou if hi: lued 
told her that he would go and skate on the lake? 
tould ha: dat hi: wud gou and skeit on da leikf 
No, she would not have let him go if he had told her 
nou, fi: wud not hcev let him gou if hi: heed tould ha: 
that. What would she have said to him if she had 
deet. hwot zvud fi: hcev sed ta him if fi: heed 
seen him go to the lake? She would have said, “You 
si:n him gou ta da leikf fi: wud hcev sed, “ju: 
must not go to-day, but in two days.” What did John’s 
niASt not gou ta'dei, bAt in tu: deiz . 33 hwot did dynz 
mother say when he came home? She said, “Go to 
mAda sei hwen hi: keim houmf fi: sed, <( gou ta 
bed at once, or you will get a cold.” Did he go to bed 
bed cet WAns, o: ju: wil get a kould ” did hi: gou ta bed 
at once? No, he did not go to bed at once; he went to 
cet WAnsf nou, hi: did not gou ta bed cet wahs; hi: went ta 
bed five minutes after his mother had said that he must. 
bed faiv minits a:fta hiz mAda heed sed dat hi: mAst. 
John’s father had said to his wife, “Do not let the 
dynz fa:da heed sed ta hiz waif, “du: not let da 
children go to the lake. The ice is too thin.” The 
tfildran gou ta da leik. di ais iz tu: pin" da 
go! 
do not go! 
Do not go out to 
play again, John, 
but go to bed at 
once! 
tell = say to 
He tells, he told, 
he has told. 
129 
Chapter Fifteen (15). 
mother had said to Helen, “Do not put on that thin 
m\da heed sed ta helin, “du: not put an deet pin 
coat to-day; the weather is too cold. Put on your 
kout ta'dei; da weda iz tu: kould. put an jua 
thick winter coat.” 
pik winta kout” 
WORDS: 
friend 
neighbour 
next to 
home 
skate 
new 
why 
got 
because 
ago 
Christmas 
weather 
let 
thick 
inch 
(to) skate 
thin 
fall 
fell 
EXERCISE A. 
George is John's —. Mr. Green is Mr. Smith's —. John 
and George went to the lake to — on the ice. George's 
father gave him — for Christmas. George’s skates are 
—, but John’s are —. — Day is the twenty-fifth of De¬ 
cember. In winter the — is cold, in summer the weather 
is —. When it is very cold, there is — on the water. 
John did not — his mother that they went — the lake; 
he said — to his mother. John said to George, “— us 
go to the lake to-day.” The mother will not — him 
go to-day, and she — not have let him go yesterday. 
She would have said, “— not go to the lake to-day, 
John!” The ice was not — enough to skate on; it was 
too —; it was only half an — thick. 
In the morning people put on their —, and in the evening 
they take them — again. John — through the ice into 
the water, when he had — for some time. Many children 
— through the ice every year when the ice is not — 
enough. It was the first time that John had — through 
the ice. When John came out of the water, he was 
very —. His mother said to him, “You — go to bed 
130 
The Fifteenth (15th) Chapter. 
at —, — you will get a cold.” John’s clothes were not 
— when he came home; they were —, and his mother 
had to — the wet clothes. 
— are John’s clothes wet? — he has fallen into the 
water. — would John’s mother have said that he must 
not go to the lake? — the ice was too thin to skate on. 
— did John say nothing to his mother? — she would 
not have — him go. Why — the boys go to the lake? 
They went there to —. 
EXERCISE B. 
Who is Mr. Green? ... Why were the boys good friends? 
... When did John get his skates? ... Did George get 
his skates for Christmas? ... Why did John say nothing 
to his mother before he went to the lake? ... Was the 
ice thick enough to skate on? ... What were John’s 
clothes when he had fallen into the water? ... What 
did his mother do with the wet clothes? ... Did John 
go to bed at once? ... 
fallen 
put on 
clothes 
off 
wet 
must 
at once 
dry 
(to) dry 
little 
tell 
nothing 
would 
if 
had 
best 
twenty-fifth 
131 
Chapter Sixteen (16). The Sixteenth (16th) Chapter. 
CLOTHES 
When George and John had come back from the lake, 
hiven dy:d$ and dyn heed k\m bcek from da leik, 
boot 
George went home to his parents’ house. “Where have 
dy:d^ went houm td hiz psarants hens. “hwea hcev 
He comes, he came, 
he has come. 
you been, George?” his mother asked. “Father is at 
ju: hi:n, dy:d$?” hie m\da a:skt. “fa:da ie cct 
home to-day; he will go with us to town to get some 
houm ta'dei; hi: wil gou wid as ta taun ta get saiii 
should 
would 
new clothes for you. If you had not come home now, 
nju: kloudz fa: ju:. if ju: heed not kAm houm nan, 
I should, 
you would, 
he would, 
we should, 
you would, 
they would. 
we should have gone without you. Go and put on 
wi: jud hcev gan wid'aut ju:. gou and put an 
another hat and coat! Take off your old boots and put 
a'nAda hcet and kout! te:k a:f jua ould hu:ts and put 
a pair = two 
on the new pair of shoes you got for Christmas!” 
an da nju: pea av fu:z ju: gat fa: krismas!” 
When George was ready to go, that is, when he had 
hwen dy.d 3 zvas redi ta gou, deet iz, hwen hi: heed 
put on his other clothes, his father said, “Are you ready 
put an hiz Ada kloudz, hiz fa:da sed, “a: ju: redi 
o? 
now? Then we can go.” “Oh, but I am not ready yet,” 
nau? den wi: keen gou . 33 “ou , bAt ai cent nat redi jet/ 3 . 
shoe 
his mother said from the first floor. “Where are my 
hiz mAda sed fram da fa:st fla:. <c hwear a: mai 
132 
The Sixteenth (16th) Chapter. 
gloves? I cannot find them. Have you Seen my gloves, 
glwzf ai kcenat faind dem. hcev ju: si:n mai glAVZ, 
George? It is too cold to go without them; my fingers 
dy.d$? it iz tit: kould ta goit wid'aut dem; mai fiygaz 
will be cold.” Mr. Green: “Oh, women can never find 
uni hi: kould ” mistd grim: “ou, wimin keen neva faind 
their things. — Have you not found them yet? George, 
bed piyz. — hcev ju: not faund dem jetf dy.d^, 
please go and find them!” George went to see if he 
pli:z gou end faind dem!” dy:d$ went td si: if hi: 
could find them — and there they were, on the table 
kud faind dem — and be a dei wa:, on da teibl 
in the hall! “Here they are, mother, I have found them. 
in da had! “hia dei a:, mAda, ai hcev faund dem. 
They were on the little table in the hall.” “That is 
dei wa: an da lit l teibl in da ha:l” “beet iz 
fine, then I am ready — I have my gloves, my bag, my 
fain, den ai cem redi — ai hcev mai cjIavz, mai bceg, mai 
handkerchief — yes, I am ready to go now. I have all 
hceykatfif — jes, ai cem redi ta gou nau. ai hcev ad 
my things with me.” Mr. Green: “It is time you came 
mai piyz wid mi:” mista grim: “it iz taim ju: keim 
now. It will be very late before we get to town. First 
nau. it wil bi: veri leit bi'fa: zvi: get ta taun. fa:st 
George came home late — we waited forty minutes for 
d^a:d^ keim houm leit — zvi: weitid fa:ti minits fa: 
him — and now we have had to wait a quarter of an 
him — and nau wi: hcev heed ta weit a kwada av an 
glove 
He finds, he found, 
he has found. 
Find my gloves, 
please = Will you 
find my gloves 
for me? 
handkerchief 
133 
Chapter Sixteen (16). 
hour for you; will this family never learn to be ready 
aua fo: ju:; zvil dis fcemili neve lam te bi: redi 
in time?” 
in faint?” 
tram 
At last they could go. It was so late that they did 
cet la.st dei kud gou. it zvoz sou leit dat del did 
not have time to walk to town, so they had to take a 
not hcev taim td wo:k td taun, sou dei heed td teik a 
MEN'S CLOTHES 
shop 
look at = see 
tram. The tram took them to a shop where George 
treem. da treem tuk dem tu a fop hzvea dy:d$ 
could get his new clothes. They went into the shop, 
kud get his nju: kloudz. dei went inta da fop, 
and a man came and asked them what they wanted. 
and a mcen keim and u:skt dem hwot dei zvontid. 
“I want to look at some clothes for my son, please,” said 
“aiwont ta Ink cet saiu kloudz fo: mu: sau, pli:z” sed 
Mr. Green. “What colour, sir?” “What colour do you 
mista grim. (C hzJUot kxla, sa:?” “hzvot kxla du: ju: 
want, George?” “Oh, I like brown best. My hair is 
zvont, dy.d^f” “ou, ai laik braun best. mai he a iz 
brown, and my eyes are brown, too. Do you like brown, 
braun, and mai aiz a: braun, tu:. du: ju: laik braun, 
too, mother?” 
tu:, m\da?” 
Mrs. Green is a dark-eyed and dark-haired little woman; 
misiz grim iz a da.kaid and da:khead litl zvuman; 
she likes brown very much. “Well, let me see, then. 
fi: laiks braun veri mAtf. “zvel, let mi: si:, den. 
134 
The Sixteenth (16th) Chapter. 
You must have a pair of trousers, no, two pairs, one 
ju: IHASt hcBV d p £9 3V tfaUZ9Z, nou, tu: p£3Z, zvah 
pair of long trousers and one pair of trousers to play in. 
p£d dv lay trauzaz and wah p£d av trauzaz ta plei in. 
You must also have a waistcoat and a coat. Do you 
ju: mAst o'.lsou hcev a weiskout and a kout. du: ju: 
like this suit of clothes, George?” “Yes, but I like 
laik dis sju:t av kloudz, dy:d$?” “jes, bAt ai laik 
that suit better; which do you like best, mother?” “I 
dcet sju:t beta; hwitj du: ju: laik best, mAda?” “ai 
like the dark-brown one best.” “Do you waht that suit 
laik da da:kbraun wau best” “du: ju: want dcet sju:t 
then, my boy?” “Yes, I should like to have the 
den, mai bait” “jes, ai fud laik ta hcev da 
dark-brown one, please.” “How much does it cost?” 
da:kbraun zvah, pli:z.” “hau niAtf dAZ it kastf” 
“It is very dear, sir, but it is also a very good suit, it 
“it iz veri dia, sa:, bAt it iz a.lsou a veri gud sju:t, it 
is the best we have. It costs six pounds (£ 6) with two 
iz da best zvi: hccv. it kasts siks poundz wid tu: 
pairs of trousers, five pounds (£ 5) with only one pair.” 
peaz av trauzaz, faiv paundz wid ounli wah p£3.” 
“That is too much money, Henry, for a suit of clothes 
“dcet iz tu: niAtf mAni, henri, fa: a sju:t av kloudz 
for a boy, is it not?” “Yes, it is very dear, but let 
fa: a bai, iz it nat?” “jes, it iz veri dia, bAt let 
him have it if he likes it so much.” “Oh, thank you, 
him hcev it if hi: laiks it sou mAtf” “on, pcerjk ju:, 
waistcoat 
good 
better 
best 
coat 
It costs, it cost, it 
has cosi. 
£ 1 = 20 shillings 
money 
I thank you, I 
thanked you, 
I have thanked 
you. 
135 
Chapter Sixteen (16). 
Grey is the colour 
of dirty snow. 
sir 
madam 
Thank you, sir = 
thank you, Mr. 
Green. 
Thank you, madam 
= thank you, Mrs. 
Green. 
He likes, he liked, 
he has liked. 
broad stripes 
ms 
narrow stripes 
father!” “We also want to look at some shirts for the 
fa:bo!” “wi: d :Is ou wont to luk cet saih Jo:ts fo: do 
boy, please.” “Yes, sir, we have here some very fine 
bo:, pli:z” “jcs, so:, wi: hcev hio sam veri fain 
grey shirts for boys, with blue stripes.” “No,” said 
grei jo:ts fo: boiz, z vib blu: straips” “non,” sed 
Mrs. Green, “the stripes are too broad; have you no 
misiz gri:n, “do straips a: tu: bro:d; hcev ju: non 
shirts with narrow stripes? And the colour must not 
jo:ts wid neerou straips t ond do IcaIo niASt not 
be blue; blue is for people with blue or grey eyes. I 
bi: blu:; bin: iz fo: pi:pi zvid blu: o: grei aiz. ai 
like green better with the brown suit and his brown 
laik grim beto zvid do braun sju:t ond hiz braun 
eyes. Let me see that shirt, please! Do you like it, 
aiz. let mi: si: beet fo:t, pli:z! du: ju: laik it, 
George?” “Yes, mother, I do.” “Let us take this one, 
dy:d$?” “jes, niAdo, ai du:” C( let as teik bis wah, 
then. How much does it cost?” “Eight shillings, madam; 
ben. hau mAtf dA2 it kost?” “eit filiyz, mcedom; 
that is very cheap, because it is a very good shirt. It 
beet iz veri tfi:p, btkoz it iz o veri gud fo:t. it 
is so cheap because we have only two of these shirts, 
iz sou tfi:p bi'koz wi: hcev ounli tu: ov bi:z fo:ts , 
and they are very small.” “Yes, that is cheap; eight 
ond bei a: veri smo:l” “jes, beet iz tfi:p; eit 
136 
shillings is not much for a good shirt. Shall we take 
filirjz iz not mAtf fo: o gud fo:t. feel wi: teik 
The Sixteenth (16th) Chapter. 
both shirts for him, Henry?” “Yes, let us do that. Do 
boup fd:ts fo: him, henri?” “jes, let as du: dcet. du: 
you want some underwear for him, too?” “Yes, but it 
ju: wont s\m a ndoweo fo: him, tu:?” “jes, bAt it 
must be woollen underwear; this time of the year is 
mASt bi: wulin Andoibeo; dis taim ov do jid is 
underwear 
too cold for cotton underwear. — Do you know where 
tu: kould fa: katn Atidawsa. — du: ju: nou hwea 
one sheep 
two sheep 
we get wool from, George?” “Oh, yes, I know that. 
wi: get wnl from, dy:d%?” “ou, jes, ai nou dcet. 
I have learned it at school. We get wool from sheep. 
ai hccv h:nd it cet sku:l. wi: get wul from fi:p. 
I also know where we get cotton from. It is a plant 
ai o:lsou non hwed wi: get kotn from, it is d pla:nt 
sheep 
product from warmer countries than our own.” The 
prodokt from wo:me kAntris Seen aue oun.” dd 
man in the shop: “Is that all, sir? No socks or ties?” 
man in dd fop: “is dcet o:l, se:f nou soks o: tais?” 
“No, we have enough now, thank you. My wife makes 
“nou, wi: hcev i'nAf nau, pceyk ju:. mai waif meiks 
all his woollen socks herself, and he never puts on his 
o:l his wulin soks ho:'self, end hi: neve puts on his 
ties. How much does it all come to, now?” “Let me 
tais. hau MAtf dAS it o:l kAm to, nau?” “let mi: 
see: a suit of clothes — six pounds (£6), 2 shirts 
si:: e sju:t ov klouds — siks pounds, tu: fo.ts 
— 16 shillings, 2 suits of woollen underwear — 
— siksti.n fi lit/s, tu: sju:ts ov wulin And owed — 
137 
Chapter Sixteen (16). 
25 shillings; 8 pounds 1 shilling in all, sir.” Mr. 
twenti'faiv jiliyz; eit paundz w\n jiliy in s:l, se:.” mists 
Green: “Here is the money.” The man: “Thank you, 
gri:n: “hiar iz da mAni” da mean: “pceyk ju:, 
sir.” George: “Oh, thank you, father and mother, for 
sa:” dy:d$: “ou, pceyk ju:, fa:da and mAda, fa: 
all the fine things I have got to-day.” Mr. Green: “Do 
a:l da fain piyz ai hcev gat ta'dei” mists grim: “du: 
you like them, my boy? That is fine, then.” 
ju: laik dem, mai bait deet iz fain, den ” 
George: “Mother, I should like to go in and speak 
dy:d 3 ; “mAda, ai jud laik ta gou in and spi:k 
to John when we get home. Is there time for that 
ta dyn hwen wi: get houm . iz dca taim fa: deet 
before dinner?” Mrs. Green: “Oh, I know that Mrs. 
bi'fa: dina?” misiz grim: “ou, ai non dat misiz 
Smith would not like that! It is too late now, and she 
smip wud nat laik deet l it iz tu: leit nau, and fi: 
has so many things to do before dinner that she cannot 
hcez sou meni piyz ta du: bi'fa: dina dat fi: kcenat 
have two boys in the house.” “But mother, John fell 
heev tu: baiz in da haus” “bAt mAda, dyn fel 
through the ice this afternoon, and I want to know if 
pru: di ais dis a:fta'nu:n, and ai want ta nou if 
he is in bed, and what his mother said.” “So you have 
hi: iz in bed, and hwat hiz mAda sed” “sou ju: hcev 
been on the ice! Well, then it is better for you to go 
bim an di ais! wel, den it iz beta fa: ju: ta gou 
138 
The Sixteenth (16th) Chapter. 
in and ask if John is ill, but you must be back in five 
in dnd a:sk if dyn ic il, b\t jit: niAst hi: bcek in faiv 
minutes. And I shall have something to say to you 
minits. dnd ai feel hcev sAinpiij td sei td jit: 
when you come home. On the ice, and I did not know! 
hwen ju: k\m houm. jn di ais, dnd ai did not non! 
We should not have given him the skates until the ice 
w': fitd njt heev givn him dd skeits ah' til di ais 
was thick enough to skate on, Henry.” 
wjz pik i'tL\f td skeit jn, henri” 
EXERCISE A. 
If George had not — home now, his parents would have 
— without him. George’s mother said that he must 
take off his old — and put on some new —. When 
George was — to go, his father said, “Are you — to go 
now?” But Mrs. Green was not ready yet; she could 
not — her —. Mr. Green said that women can — find 
their things. George’s parents had to — for him, be¬ 
cause he came home so —. It was so late that they 
had to take a — to town. The tram took them to a 
— where they could get George’s new clothes. 
The man in the shop asked them what they —. “I 
want to — at some clothes for my son, please,” said 
Mr. Green. George — the brown colour best. Mr. 
Green got two — of trousers for George. Mrs. Green 
said that the suit was too — for a boy. It cost too 
much —. “I like this suit, but I like that suit —,” 
WORDS: 
without 
boot 
shoe 
ready 
glove 
find 
found 
never 
yet 
bag 
handkerchief 
late 
wait 
tram 
shop 
want 
look at 
brown 
139 
Chapter Sixteen (16). 
like 
trousers 
pair 
madam 
sir 
coat 
waistcoat 
suit 
better 
cost 
dear 
pound (£) 
money 
thank 
shirt 
fine 
broad 
stripe 
grey 
narrow 
cheap 
shilling 
underwear 
woollen 
wool 
cotton 
know 
product 
sheep 
sock 
tie 
should 
dark-eyed 
dark-haired 
dark-brown 
please 
George said. They got a shirt with narrow —, because 
Mrs. Green did not like the — stripes. The man in the 
shop said that the shirt was very —; it cost only eight 
shillings. They also got some woollen — for him. 
George said that we get — from sheep. We get — 
from warmer countries than our own. 
— they get socks for. George? No, they did —; Mrs. 
Green makes all his — socks herself. — did they not 
get a tie for him? — he never puts on his ties. — 
do you say to a person when he has given you some¬ 
thing? You say, “— you!” to a person when you get 
something from him. — was Mrs. Green not ready 
to go? — she could not find her —. Where did 
George — her gloves? He — them in the hall. How 
long did George’s parents — for him? They — forty 
minutes for him. 
EXERCISE B. 
Did George have his boots on when he went to town? ... 
How did they go to town? ... Where did they get 
George’s new clothes? ... Why was it late, before they 
got to town? ... What things did Mrs. Green take with 
her to town? .. . What did they get for George at the 
shop? ... Was his new suit cheap? ... Did they also 
get handkerchiefs for George? ... How much money did 
Mr. Green give the man in the shop? ... Did George 
like a brown suit best? .. . Which shirt did his mother 
like best? .. . Where do we get cotton and wool from? . .. 
Who makes George’s socks? ... What did George say to 
his father when he had got all the fine things? . .. 
140 
Chapter Seventeen (17). 
The Seventeenth (17th) Chapter. 
MRS. SMITH’S NEW FROCK 
Mrs. Smith has a very good friend, Mrs. Daisy Brown; 
mists smip has d veri gud frend, misi2 deisi braun; 
she is the woman who lives on the other side of the 
ji: is dd wumdn hu: livs on di Add said dv dd 
road. Next Wednesday is her birthday, and Mrs. Smith 
roud. nekst wen 2 di is hd: bo:pdei, dnd mists smip 
and her other friends will come to her house in the 
dnd hd: Add frends wil kAtn td hd: haus in di 
evening to see her. 
i:vniy td si: ho:. 
Yesterday Mrs. Smith said to her husband, who was in 
jestddi misis smip sed td hd: hAsbdnd, hu: wos in 
the sitting-room with a good book, “Allan, I have no 
dd sitiyru:m wid d gud buk, “celon, ai hcev nou 
frock to put on next Wednesday on Daisy’s birthday. 
frok td put on nekst wensdi on deisis bo:pdei. 
I must have a new one.” “What, have you no frock? 
ai iiiAst hcev o nju: WAn” “hwot, hcev ju: nou frokf 
You have a green silk frock, a brown one, and one 
ju: hcev o grim silk frok, o braun WAn, dnd WAn 
with little flowers; you have three good frocks.” “No, 
wid litl flauos; ju: hcev pri: gud froks ." “nou, 
the green frock is the one which I had on last year on 
do gri:n frok is dd WAn hwitf ai heed on la:st jid on 
who 
which 
The person who 
lives there. 
The thing which 
is there. 
frock 
5/1 
141 
Chapter Seventeen (17). 
He buys, he 
bought, he has 
bought. 
myself 
yourself 
Is this for 
myself? 
Yes, it is for 
yourself. 
I wash myself. 
You wash 
yourself. 
new 
newer 
newest 
her birthday, and the others are not good enough.” 
ha: ba:pdei, dnd di Adas a: not gud i'nxf” 
“Well, if you must have a new frock, you must. Here 
“wel, if ju: m\st hcev a nju: frak, ju: mAst. hidr 
is twelve pounds (£12) to buy a new frock. Is that 
is twelv paunds td bai a nju: frak. is dcet 
enough money?” “Oh yes, I can buy a very good frock 
i'nAf ma ni?” “ou jes, ai keen bai a veri gud frak 
for £12. I know a little shop which has very 
fa: twelv paunds . ai nou a litl Jap hwitf hces veri 
good things, and they are not very dear. I shall go 
gud pigs, and dei a: njt veri did. ai feel gou 
now, so that I can be back in time for dinner.” 
nau, sou dat ai keen bi: bcek in taim fa: dina” 
In the Shop. 
“What can I do for you, madam?” “I want to look at 
“hwat kcenaidu: fa: ju:, mcedam? 33 “ai want ta luk cet 
some evening-frocks which are not too dear.” “For 
SAm i:vniy fraks hwitf a: nat tu: dia. 33 “fa: 
yourself, madam?” “Yes, for myself.” “We have some 
jua'self, mcedam?” “jes, fa: mai'self” “wi: hcev SAm 
new silk frocks from Paris, the newest frocks we have 
nju: silk fraks fram pceris, da nju:ist fraks wi: hcev 
got.” “Yes, let me look at them. Can I try them on?” 
gat ” ({ jes, let mi: luk cet deni, keen ai trai dem an? 33 
“Yes, madam, we have some small rooms here for that. 
“jes, mcedam, wi: hcev SAm sma:l ru:ms hia fa: dcet. 
142 
The Seventeenth (17th) Chapter. 
It is better to try and see if the frocks are big enough 
it iz beta td irai and si: if da fraks a: big i'n\f 
for you. This frock is very beautiful; the blue colour 
fj: ju:. dis frak iz veri bjn: tiful: da blit: k\la 
goes very well with madam’s beautiful blue eyes.” 
(joitz veri wel zvid meed am z bjn:tiful bin: aiz.” 
“Yes, it is a beautiful frock. Let me try it on. — Oh, 
“jes, it iz a bjn:tiful frak. let mi: trai it an. — ou, 
it is too big for me.” The woman in the shop: “Will 
it iz tu: big fa: mi:” da umman in da fap: u wil 
you try on this frock, please, madam?” Mrs. Smith: 
ju: trai an dis frak . pli:z, meed am?” rnisiz smip: 
“No, I do not like this one so well. Can you not make 
“non, ai du: nat laik dis w\n sou wel. keen ju: nat meik 
the blue frock smaller? I must have it next Tuesday. 
da bin: frak sma.la? ai m\st hcev it nekst tju.zdi. 
Can it be ready then?” “Yes, we shall have it ready. 
keen it bi: redi den?” “ jes, wi: feel hcev it redi. 
Shall we send it to you, madam?” “Yes, I should like 
feel wi: send it ta ju:, mcedam?” “jes, ai jud laik 
you to send it, please.” “What is the address?” 
ju: ta send it, pli:z” “hwat iz di a'dres?” 
“Forty-nine (49), Nelson Road. You sent me some 
“fa:ti'nain, nelsn roud. ju: sent mi: saw 
things last week, but they went to the wrong address 
pivjz la:st wi:k, b\t dei went ta da ray a'dres 
first. You sent them to number forty-five (45). Have 
fa:st. ju: sent deni ta nxmba fa.ti'faiv. licev 
I try; 
he tries, he tried, 
he has tried. 
He sends, he sent, 
he has sent. 
5/2 
143 
Chapter Seventeen (17). 
that 
The person that 
lives there = the 
person who lives 
there. 
The thing that is 
there = the thing 
which is there. 
£ 1 (one pound) 
= 20 shillings 
1 shilling 
= 12 pence 
one penny 
eleven pence 
you the right address now?” “Yes, madam, number 
ju: da rait a'dres nan?” “jes, madam, n\mba 
forty-nine.” “Yes, that is the right number. Oh, how 
fa.’ti'nain.” “jes, dat iz da rait n\mba. ou, hau 
much does the frock cost?” “Ten pounds ten shillings, 
mAtj d\z da frak kast?” “ten paundz ten filiyz, 
madam. — Do you want to look at some silk stockings? 
madam. — dn: ju: want ta luk at SAm silk stakiyz? 
We have some new colours that would go very well 
wi: hav SAm nju: kAhz dat wud gou veri wel 
with the blue frock.” 
wid da blu: frak” 
“These stockings are very good. What is the price?” 
“di:z stakiyz a: veri gud. hwat iz da prais?” 
“The price is fourteen shillings and elevenpence 
“da prais iz fa:ti:n filiyz and i'levnpans 
(14/11).” “I shall take only one pair, because 
(fa:ti:n and flevn)” “ai jal teik ounli WAn pea, bi'kaz 
I want to buy a new petticoat, too, and I have only 
ai want ta bai a nju: petikout, tu:, and ai hav ounli 
£ 12 with me. Have you petticoats in the same 
twelv paundz wid mi:, hav ju: petikouts in da seim 
blue colour as the frock, and at not too high a price?” 
blu: kAla az da frak, and at nat tu: hai a prais?” 
“We have some petticoats at a very low price, but they 
“wi: hav SAm petikouts at a veri lou prais, bAt dei 
are the wrong blue colour. If you want the same 
a: da ray blu: kAla. if ju: want da seim 
144 
The Seventeenth (17th) Chapter. 
colour, the price is a little higher; but they are not 
lace fj n 
kAh, da prais iz a litl haia; bxt dei a: not 
i7 
very dear. This one without lace costs ten shillings 
veri dia. dis zvAti wid'aut leis hosts ten filiyz 
/ f 
and elevenpence (10/11), and the same petticoat 
and i'levnpans (ten and i'levn), and da seim petikout 
1 
with lace costs thirteen shillings and elevenpence 
wid leis kosts pa:ti:n filiyz and i'levnpans 
petticoat 
(13/11). It is just the right colour for your 
(pa:ti:n and i'levn). it iz d^Ast da rait kAla fa: jua 
frock.” “What beautiful lace! I shall take that one. 
frak.” “hwat bju:tiful leis! ai feel teik dcet WAn. 
cottar 
I have just enough money to buy it. Oh, just one thing 
ai hcev d$Ast i'nAf mAni ta bai it. ou, d$Ast WAn piy 
more! I should like to have a small lace collar for my 
mo:! ai fud laik ta hcev a smo:l leis kola fo: mai 
old frock, but I have no more money with me. Will 
ould frok, bAt ai hcev nou mo: mAni wid mi:, wil 
you send a bill for the collar with the frock when you 
ju: send a bil fo: da kola wid da frok hwen ju: 
send it? — Thank you, that is very kind of you.” “Oh, 
send it? — pceyk ju:, dcet iz veri kaind av ]u:.” “ou, 
that is nothing, madam. We are glad to do that for 
dcet iz nApiy, mcedam. wi: a: glced ta du: dcet fo: 
you.” 
bill 
ju:. 33 
145 
Chapter Seventeen (17). 
Back at Home. 
small 
smaller 
smallest 
(a short word) 
but: 
beautiful 
more beautiful 
most beautiful 
(a long word) 
“Hallo, Allan! Here I am again.” “Hallo, Patricia! 
“ha'lou, celdn! hid ai am a'gein” “ha'lou, pa'trifa! 
Did you buy the frock that you wanted?” “Yes, I 
did ju: bai da frak bat ju: want id?” “jes, cd 
bought the most beautiful blue silk frock I have seen 
bait da moust bjuitiful blu: silk frak ai hav si:n 
for a long time, and a pair of stockings, and a collar, 
fa: a lay taim, and a pea av stakiyz, and a kala, 
The frock which 
Mrs. Smith bought 
= the frock that 
Mrs. Smith bought 
= the frock Mrs. 
Smith bought. 
and a petticoat.” “Did you buy all that? Well, I should 
and a petikout” (C did ju: bai a:l bat? wel, ai jud 
have known that I would get no money back!” “Allan, 
hcev noun bat ai wud get nou m\ni bcek!” “alan, 
I did not have enough money, but the woman who has 
ai did nat hcev i'n\f m\ni, b\t da wuman hu: has 
the shop said she would send a bill with the frock. 
da fap sed fi: wud send a bil wid da frak. 
I know, I knew, 
I have known. 
That was very kind of her, was it not?” “Not enough 
beet waz veri kaind av ha:, waz it nat?” “nat i'n\f 
money? How big is the bill?” “Only four shillings 
m.\ni? hau big iz da bil?” “ounli fa: filiyz 
and elevenpence (4/11).” “Well, I am glad it is 
and i'levnpans (fa: andi'levn)” “wel, ai am glad it iz 
no more. When will dinner be ready?” “In half an 
nou ma:. hwen wil dina bi: redi?” “in ha:f an 
hour.” “Fine — oh, Patricia, will you be so kind as 
aua” “fain — ou, pa'trifa, wil ju: bi: sou kaind az 
14fi 
The Seventeenth (17th) Chapter. 
to give me that book? Thank you!” 
to giv mi: deet bukf pceyk ju:! 33 
“Patricia! ” “Yes, Allan?” “How many people will you 
“pd'trijd!” “jes, colon?” “hau meni pi:pl wil ju: 
be at Daisy’s house on her birthday?” “I do not know 
hi: cet deists haus on ho: bo:pdei? 33 “aidu: not nou 
how many we shall be this year. Last year we were 
hau meni wi: feel bi: dis jio. la:st jid wi: wo: 
ten.” “All women?” “Yes, we girls like to be together 
ten/' “o:l wimin?” “jes, wi: go:Is laik to bi: to'gedo 
sometimes without our husbands.” “Oh, so I do not 
SAmtaims wid'aut auo h\zbondz/ 3 “ou, sou ai du: not 
have to go, too? Fine! Then I could take the children 
hcev to gou,tu:f fain! den ai kud teik do tfildron 
out with me and have dinner in town that day — that 
aut wid mi: ond hcev dino in taun deet dei — deet 
is, not the baby. We could ask one of your aunts if 
is, not do beibi. wi: kud a:sk w\n ov juo a:nts if 
she would be so kind as to come and look after her.” 
fi: wud bi: sou kaind ces to k\m ond luk a:fto ho:/ 3 
“Yes, we could ask Aunt Jane. She is always very 
“jes, wi: kud a:sk a:nt dyin. fi: is o:lwis veri 
kind. The baby likes her, and she looked after Helen 
kaind. do beibi. laiks ho:, ond fi: lukt a:fto helin 
and John many times when they were younger. So 
ond dyn meni taims hwen dei wo: jAygo. sou 
she knows where things are in the house, and how to 
fi: nous hweo pirjs a: in do haus, ond hau to 
147 
Chapter Seventeen (17). 
give the baby her food, and what to do when the baby 
giv da beibi ha: fu:d, and hwot ta du: hwen da beibi 
is wet — and everything.” 
iz wet — and evripirj” 
As you have seen in some of the last chapters, some of 
cez ju: hcev si:n in sam av da la:st tjceptaz, s\m av 
the verbs do not take an -s in the present tense. (The 
da va:bz du: not teik an es in da preznt tens. (da 
time of a verb we call its tense. The time “now” we 
tairn av a va:b wi: ko:l its tens. da tairn “nau” wi: 
call the present tense.) Most of the verbs take an -s 
ko:l da preznt tens.) moust av da va:bz teik an es 
in the present tense when the verb says that one thing 
in da preznt tens hwen da va:b sez dat wah pig 
or one person does something. We say: he goes, she 
o: WAn pa:sn dAZ s Am pig. wi: sei: hi: gouz, ji: 
says. But some verbs do not take this -s. We say: 
sez. bAt SAm va:bz du: not teik dis es. wi: sei: 
he can, she will, he must, he shall, without the -s. 
hi: keen, fi: wil, hi: mAst, hi: feel, wid'aut di es. 
Another thing, too, is not the same in these verbs as 
a'nAda pig, tu:, iz not da seim in di:z va:bz cez 
in other verbs. We say: he goes, he went, he has gone; 
in Ada va:bz. wi: sei: hi: gouz, hi: went, hi: hcez gan; 
she plays, she played, she has played. But with the 
fi: pleiz, fi: pleid, fi: hcez pleid. bAt wid da 
148 
The Seventeenth (17th) Chapter. 
verbs “can”, “will”, “must”, “shall”, we must put other 
vd:bz “keen”, “wil”, “mASt”, “feel”, wi: m\st put Add 
words after “has” and “have”. We say: I can swim, 
Wd:dz a:ftd “hcez” and “hcev”. wi: sei: ai keen swim, 
or I am able to swim; I could swim, or I was able to 
o: ai cem eibl td swim; ai kud swim, o: ai woz eibl td 
swim; but only: I have been able to swim for many 
swim; bAt ounli: ai hcev bi:n eibl td swim jo: meni 
years. — He must go, or he has to go; he must go, or 
jidz. — hi: mASt gou, o: hi: hcez td gou; hi: mASt gou, o: 
he had to go; but only: he has had to go. — He shall 
hi: heed td gou; bAt ounli: hi: hcez heed td gou. — hi: feel 
do it, or he has to do it; he should do it, or he had to do it; 
du: it, o: hi: hcez td du: it; hi: fud du: it, o: hi: heed td du: it; 
but only: he has had to do it. — I will give her the pencil, 
bAt ounli: hi: heez heed td du: it. —ai wil giv hd: dd pensil, 
or I want to give her the pencil; I would give her the 
o: ai wont td giv hd: dd pensil; ai wud giv hd: dd 
pencil, or I wanted to give her the pencil; but only: 
pensil, i o: ai wontid td giv hd: dd pensil; bAt ounli: 
I have wanted to give her the pencil. 
ai hcev wontid td giv hd: dd pensil. 
EXERCISE A. 
Mrs. Smith told her husband that she had no — to put 
on on Daisy’s birthday. People-their clothes in 
the morning. Mr. Smith gave his wife £12 to — a new 
frock, and she — a beautiful one in town. When she 
149 
Chapter Seventeen (17). 
had — the frock, she wanted to buy — things, too. 
Mrs. Smith tried — some new — frocks from Paris. 
The woman in the shop said that Mrs. Smith’s blue 
eyes were —. The woman asked, “— we send you 
the frock, madam?” and Mrs. Smith answered that 
she — like them to send it. Mrs. Smith said to the 
WORDS: 
frock 
silk 
buy 
bought 
myself 
yourself 
try 
tried 
beautiful 
address 
send 
sent 
who 
which 
right 
wrong 
number 
stocking 
hallo 
that 
price 
same 
penny 
pence 
lace 
petticoat 
just 
woman, “Will you — the frock to my —, 49, Nelson 
Road, please?” 49, Nelson Road, was the — address, 
and 45, Nelson Road, was the — address. 
Mrs. Smith has a friend — lives on the other side of 
the road. The stockings — Mrs. Smith bought were 
made of —. The English say: The woman who lives on 
the other side of the road, or: The woman — lives on 
the other side of the road. They say: The stockings 
which Mrs. Smith bought, or: The stockings — Mrs. 
Smith bought. The time of a verb we call it*: —. The 
price of the petticoat with lace was a — higher than 
the price of the petticoat without lace. 
— in Nelson Road does Mrs. Smith live? She lives 
at — forty-nine. What did Mrs. Smith buy at the — 
of 14/11 (fourteen shillings and —) ? She bought a pair 
of —. — did Mrs. Smith buy at the price of thirteen 
— and elevenpence? She bought a — of the — blue 
colour as the frock. Had she enough money to — it? 
Yes, she had- : money to buy it. Had she enough 
money to buy the — collar? No, but the woman in 
the shop would send a — for the lace —. — did Mrs. 
Smith say? She said it was — of her. Do you wash 
— in the morning? Yes, I wash — in the morning. 
150 
The Seventeenth (17th) Chapter. 
EXERCISE B. 
Who is Mrs. Smith’s friend? ... What did Mrs. Smith 
buy in town? . . . Where did she try on the frock? . . . 
What more did she buy? ... What colour is Mrs. Smith’s 
new frock? . . . What is the address of Mr. and Mrs. 
Smith? ... Was the petticoat the same colour as the 
frock? ... What did Mrs. Smith buy for her old frock? 
... Had she enough money to buy the lace collar? ... Was 
the woman in the shop glad to send a bill for the collar? 
... How big was the bill she sent for it? ... 
collar 
bill 
known 
kind 
a little 
glad 
present 
tense 
chapter 
forty-nine 
5/3 
151 
Chapter Eighteen (18). 
The Eighteenth (18th) Chapter. 
postman 
He brings, he 
brought, he has 
brought. 
letter 
THE BIRTHDAY PARTY 
The other day, Mrs. Smith was at her friend Daisy’s 
di Add dei, misiz smip waz cet ha: frend deiziz 
birthday party. (When it is your birthday, you have 
ba.pdei pa:ti. (hwen it iz jua ba:pdei, ju: hcev 
a party for your friends.) Some days before, the 
a pa:ti fa: jua frendz.) saih deiz bifa:, da 
postman had brought her a letter from her friend. 
poustman heed bra:t ha: a let a fram ha: frend. 
In the letter Daisy wrote that she would be very glad 
in da let a deizi rout dat fi: wud bi: veri glced 
to see her at her birthday party on the next Wednesday, 
ta si: ha: cet ha: ba:pdei pa:ti an da nekst wenzdi, 
and that she wanted her to come to dinner at seven 
and dat fi: wantid ha: ta £aw ta dina cet sevn 
o’clock. 
a'klak. 
“Look here,” Mrs. Smith said to her husband and gave 
(< luk hia” misiz smip sed ta ha: hAzband and geiv 
him the letter, “an invitation to my best friend Daisy’s 
him da leta, “an invi'teifan ta mai best frend deiziz 
birthday party, and it is not an invitation to afternoon 
ba:pdei pa:ti, and it iz nat an invi y teifan tu a:fta'nu:n 
tea, but to dinner, and later we are to have chocolate. 
ti:, bAt ta dina, and leita wi: a: ta hcev tfakalit. 
152 
The Eighteenth (18th) Chapter. 
How glad I shall be to put on my new frock for the 
hau glced ai feel bi: ta put on mai nju: frak fa: da 
first time! You will dine in town then that day, my 
fa:st taim! ju: wil dain in taun den dcet dei, mai 
dear, will you not?” 
did, wil ju: not?” 
What is a letter? The English word letter means two 
hwat iz d letdf di iyglif wa:d let a mi: ns tu: 
things. First it means one of the letters of the alpha- 
pitjz. fa:st it mi:ns w\n av da letaz av di celfa- 
bet: a, b, c, etc. (et cetera). Then it means a piece of 
bit: ei, bi:, si:, it'setra. den it mi:nz a pi:s av 
paper on which you have written something to a person. 
peipa an hwitf ju: hcev ritn SAmpitj tu a pa:sn. 
Who brings you the letters? The postman brings the 
hu: brifjz ju: da letaz? da poustman briyz da 
letters. Who wrote a letter to Mrs. Smith? Her friend 
letaz. hu: rout a leta ta misiz smip? ha: frend 
Daisy wrote her a letter in which she asked her to 
deizi rout ha: a leta in hwitf fi: a:skt ha: ta 
dinner on her birthday. Did Daisy invite Mrs. Smith's 
dina an ha: ba.'pdei. did deizi in'vait misiz smips 
husband, too? No, she only invited Mrs. Smith; the 
hxzband, tu:? nou, fi: ounli in'vaitid misiz smip; di 
invitation was not for Mr. Smith. 
invi'teifan waz nat fa: mista smip. 
What is chocolate? It is a brown drink which people 
hwat iz tfakalit? it iz a braun driyk hwitf pi:pl 
153 
Chapter Eighteen (18). 
sometimes have on birthdays; but you can also buy 
SAmtaimz hcev an ba:pdeiz; b\t ju: keen oilsou bai 
a piece of chocolate in a shop to eat, and then you get 
a pi:s dv tfakalit in a fop tu i:t, and den ju: get 
it in a piece of paper. 
it in a pi:s av peipa. 
On Wednesday, Mrs. Smith had to begin two hours 
an 1 wenzdi, misiz sniip heed ta bi'gin tu: auaz 
He begins, he 
began, he has 
begun. 
before the party to make herself ready. She began to 
bi'fa: da pa:ti ta meik ha:'self redi. fi: bi'gcen ta 
make herself ready in the afternoon at five o’clock. 
meik ha:'self redi in di a:fta'nu:n ert faiv a'klak. 
She took a bath, and then she dressed, that is, she put 
fi: tuk a ba:p, and den fi: drest, deet iz, fi: put 
to-night = this 
evening 
on her clothes, and at half past six she was ready to go. 
an ha: kloudz, and cet ha:f pa:st siks fi: waz redi ta gou. 
“Now, be good children,” she said to John and Helen; 
“nau, bi: gud tfildran,” fi: sed ta dyn and helin; 
“if you are naughty to-night when I am away, you 
“if ju: a: na:ti f ta'nait hwen ai cem a'wei, ju: 
must not go out and play to-morrow. George is always 
mASt nat gou aut and plei ta'marou. dy:d$ iz a:lwiz 
a good boy when he is alone at home, but you are not 
a gud bai hwen hi: iz a'loun cet houm, bAt ju: a: nat 
always good. You have been naughty children the last 
a.lwiz gud. ju: hcev bi:n na:ti tfildran da la:st 
two or three times I have been away.” “But this time 
tu: a: pri: taimz ai hcev bi:n a'wei” “bAt dis taint 
154 
The Eighteenth (18th) Chapter. 
we will be good children, mamma.” “All right, then I 
wi: wil bi: gud tfildran, ma'ma:” “a:l rait, den ai 
will go. Good-bye, children!” “Good-bye, mamma!” 
wil gou. gud'bai, tfildran!” “gud'bai, ma'ma:!” 
At what time did Mrs. Smith begin to make herself 
cet hwjt taim did misiz smip bigin td meik ha:'self 
ready for Daisy's birthday party? She began at five 
redi fa: deiziz ba:pdei pa:tif fi: bi'gcen cet faiv 
o’clock. What did she do? First she took a bath, and 
a'klak. hwat did fi: du:f fa:st fi: tuk a ba:p, and 
then she dressed. What does the word “to dress” mean? 
den fi: drest. hwat d\z da wa:d “ta dres” mi:nf 
It means to put on your clothes. Are Helen and John 
it mi:nz ta put an jua kloudz. a: helin and dyn 
always good children? No, they are not always good; 
a:lwiz gud tfildranf non, dei a: nat a:lwiz gud; 
sometimes they are naughty. Is George always a good 
SAmtaimz dei a: na:ti. iz d^a:d^ a.lwiz a gud 
boy? Yes, he is always a good boy. What did Mrs. 
bait jes, hi: iz a:\wiz a gud bai. hwat did misiz 
Smith say to her children just before she went to the 
smip sei ta ha: tfildran d^ASt bifa: fi: went ta da 
birthday party? She said, “Good-bye, children!” 
ba:pdei pa:tif fi: scd, “gnd'bai, tfildran!” 
“Hallo, Daisy, how are you?” “Hallo, Patricia, I am 
“ha'lou, deizi, hau a: ju:f” “ha'lou, pa'trifa, ai com 
very well, thank you, and I hope you are well, too.” 
veri wel, pceyk ju: f and ai houp ju: a: wel, tu:” 
I will go = I want 
to go. 
we will be good 
= we want to be 
good. 
155 
Chapter Eighteen (18). 
“I am all right, thank you. And how is your sister? 
“ai am a:l rait, payk ju:. and hau iz jud sistaf 
The last time I heard of her, she was ill.” “She is 
da la:st taim ai ha:d av ha:, fi: waz il.” “fi: iz 
still = yet 
She is still in bed 
= she is in bed 
yet. 
better now, thank you, but she is still in bed.” “I 
beta nau, payk ju:, b\t fi: iz stil in bed” “ai 
hope it will not be long before she is all right again. 
houp it wil not bi: lay bi'fa: fi: iz o:l rait a'gein. 
Here is my birthday present for you. I hope you will 
hiar iz mai ba:pdei preznt fa: ju:. ai houp ju: wil 
like it.” “Oh, a pair of silk stockings; thank you, dear; 
laik it” “ou, a pea av silk stakiyz; payk ju:, dia; 
I had hoped for a pair of stockings, but it is too much 
ai had houpt fa: a pea av stakiyz, b\t it iz tu: m\tf 
to give me such a fine birthday present.” “Oh no, you 
ta giv mi: s\tf a fain ba:pdei preznt” “ou nou, ju: 
have always been such a good and dear friend to me.” 
hav a:lwiz bi:n SAtf a gud and dia frend ta mi:.” 
Daisy: “It is kind of you to say that, my dear. Now 
deizi: “it iz kaind av ju: ta sei dat, mai dia. nau 
all my guests have come. You know them all, Patricia, 
a:l mai gests hav k\m. ju: nou dem a:l, pa'trifa, 
except this young lady. This is Mrs. Hudson, and this 
ik'sept dis jxy leidi. dis iz misiz h\dsn, and dis 
is Mrs. Smith.” Mrs. Smith: “How do you do, Mrs. 
iz misiz smip.” misiz smip: “hau du: ju: du:, misiz 
Hudson.” Mrs. Hudson: “How do you do, Mrs. Smith.” 
h\dsn.” misiz h\dsn: “hau du: ju; du:, misiz smip.” 
156 
The Eighteenth (18th) Chapter. 
Daisy: “Dinner is ready now.” 
deist: “dind is redi nau” 
Did Mrs. Smith give Daisy a birthday present? Yes, 
did misiz smif> giv deizi a ba.pdei prezntf jes, 
she gave her a pair of silk stockings as a birthday 
fi: geiv ha: a pea av silk stakiyz cez a ba:pdei 
present. Did Daisy like her birthday present? Yes, 
preznt. did deizi laik ha: ba.pdei prezntf jes, 
ladies are always glad to get such presents. They can 
leidiz a: a:lwiz glced ta get SAtj preznts. dei keen 
never get enough silk stockings. 
neva get i'n\f silk stakiyz. 
Did Daisy have other guests than Mrs. Smith and Mrs. 
did deizi hcev Ada gests deen misiz smip and misiz 
Hudson on her birthday? Yes, she had still other guests 
h\dsn an ha: ba:pdeif jes, fi: heed stil Ada gests 
on her birthday. When do people have guests? When 
an ha: ba:pdei. hwen du: pi:pi hcev gests? hwen 
they give a party, they invite guests to come to their 
dei giv a pa:ti, dei in'vait gests ta kAm ta dea 
home. Were all the people at the party ladies? No, 
houm. wa: a:l da pi:pl cet da pa:ti leidiz? nou, 
not all, but almost all of them were ladies; the only 
nat a:l, bAt a:lmoust a:l av dem wa: leidiz; di ounli 
gentleman was Daisy’s husband. Were all the guests 
dyntlman waz deiziz hAzband. wa: a:l da gests 
ladies? Yes, all the guests were ladies; Daisy’s husband 
leidiz? jes, a:l da gests wa: leidiz; deiziz JiAzband 
lady = woman 
gentleman = man 
one lady 
two ladies 
one gentleman 
two gentlemen 
157 
Chapter Eighteen (18). 
was not a guest in his own house. Did Mrs. Smith know 
woz not a gest in hiz oun haus. did misiz smip non 
all the guests? No, she did not know all of them, but 
d: 1 dd gestsf nou, fi: did not non o:l av dem, b\t 
almost all; she had never seen Mrs. Hudson before. 
j'Amoust o:l; fi: heed nevd si:n misiz hAdsn bi'fa :. 
What did Mrs. Smith say when she saw Mrs. Hudson? 
hwjt did misiz smip set hwen fi: so: misiz hAdsn? 
She said, “How do you do.” And what did Mrs. Hudson 
fi: sed, “hau du: ju: du:” and hwot did misiz hAdsn 
say? She said, “How do you do”, too. In England you 
seif fi: sed, “hau du: ju: du:”, tu:. in itjgland ju: 
say “How do you do” the first time you see a person; 
sei “hau du: ju: du:” dd fa:st taim ju: si: a pa:sn; 
but when you see a person you know well, you only 
bAt hwen ju: si: a pa:sn ju: nou wel, ju: ounli 
say “Hallo” or “How are you?” 
sei “ha'lou” a: “hau a: ju:?” 
EXERCISE A. 
The other day Mrs. Smith was at her friend Daisy's 
birthday —. Some days before, she got an — for the 
party. The postman — the invitation in a —. It was 
not an invitation to-, but to dinner. The word 
“letter” — two things: the letters of the alphabet, and 
a — of paper on which you have written something. 
Daisy had not — Mr. Smith, but only his wife. Mrs. 
Smith — to make herself ready at five o'clock. She 
took a —, and then she —. John and Helen are not 
158 
The Eighteenth (18th) Chapter. 
always good children, sometimes they are —. George 
is — a good boy. 
“Hallo, Patricia, — are you?” “I am very well, thank 
you, and I — you are well, too. How — your sister?” 
“She is better now, — you.” What — Patricia give 
Daisy? Her birthday — for Daisy was a pair of silk 
stockings. — did Daisy say? She said, “It is too — 
to give me — a fine present.” 
Had Daisy invited both — and gentlemen to her party? 
No, the — were all ladies. What — Patricia say to 
Mrs. Hudson? She said, “How — you—, Mrs. Hudson.” 
Had Mrs. Smith — all the guests before? No, she had 
seen — all the guests, but not Mrs. Hudson. — do 
you say the first time you see a person? You say, 
“-”. And what — you say to a person you 
know well? You say, “—”, or “-?” 
EXERCISE B. 
Who brings the letters? ... What does the word “letter” 
mean? ... What was in the letter for Mrs. Smith? ... 
When do people have parties? ... Are John and Helen 
always good children? ... Were all the guests ladies? 
... When did Mrs. Smith begin to dress? ... Had the 
guests all come when Patricia came? ... What did Mrs. 
Smith say to her children just before she went to the 
party? ... What was Mrs. Smith’s birthday present for 
Daisy? ... Was Daisy glad to get such a beautiful pair of 
silk stockings? ... Who was the only gentleman at the 
party? ... Had Patricia seen Mrs. Hudson before? ... 
WORDS: 
postman 
letter 
bring 
brought 
invitation 
invite 
ask 
guest 
party 
chocolate 
drink 
lady 
gentleman 
begin 
began 
dress 
to-night 
such 
present 
piece 
mean 
etc. 
et cetera 
mamma 
naughty 
hope 
all right 
always 
good-bye 
dear 
almost 
still 
159 
Chapter Nineteen (19). 
The Nineteenth (19th) Chapter. 
He site, he sat, 
he has sat. 
plate 
THE DINNER 
Daisy’s husband had been in his bedroom to dress, but 
deiziz hAzbdnd heed bi:n in hiz bedru:m ta dres, b\t 
now he came down from the first floor. When they 
nau hi: keim daun from da fa:st fla:. hwen dei 
had all come into the dining-room, Daisy’s husband 
head a:l k\m inta da dainit/ru:m, deiziz hAzband 
said, “Please sit down at the table. Will you sit down 
sed, “pli:z sit daun cat da teibi. wil ju: sit daun 
there, Mrs. Smith, and will you sit down on that chair 
dea, misiz smip, and wil ju: sit daun an deet tjea 
next to my wife, Mrs. Hudson?” When they had all 
nekst ta mai waif, misiz hAdsn?” hwen dei heed a:l 
sat down at the table, they began to eat. First they had 
seat daun eet da teibi, dei bi'geen tu i:t . fa:st dei heed 
soup made from many vegetables. “What a good soup,” 
su:p meid from meni vedytablz. t( hwat a gud su:p,” 
Mrs. Hudson said, “how good it tastes!” Daisy: “I am 
misiz hAdsn sed, (< hau gud it teists ! 93 deizi: “ai earn 
glad that it tastes good. Do you want another plate 
gleed dat it teists gud. du: ju: want a'nAda pleit 
of soup?” “No, thank you, I can eat no more.” Daisy’s 
av su:p?” “ne)u, peeyk ju:, ai keen i:t nou ma:” deiziz 
husband: “Please give me another plate of soup. I am 
JiAzband: (e pli:z giv mi: a'nAda pleit av su:p. ai earn 
160 
The Nineteenth (19th) Chapter. 
very hungry. I had so much work to do to-day that 
veri hxYjgri. at heed sou MAtf wa:k ta du: ta'dei ddt 
I had no time for lunch, so now I am so hungry that 
ai heed non taim jo: Iah{, sou nauaieem sou hAygri dot 
two plates of soup are not too much for me.” 
tu: pleits dv su:p a: not tu: mAtf fo: mi:” 
Where had Daisy’s husband been? He had been in his 
hwea heed deizi2 hAzband bi:n? hi: heed bi:n in hiz 
bedroom on the first floor to dress. Did he come down 
bedru.m on do fa:st flo: to dres . did hi: kAm daun 
to the guests? Yes, he came down from the first floor 
td da gests? jes, hi: keim daun from da fa:st flo: 
when he had dressed. What did the guests do when 
hwen hi: heed drest. hwot did da gests du: hwen 
they came into the dining-room? They sat down at 
dei keim inta da dainiyru:m? dei seet daun eet 
the table. Who asked them to sit down? Daisy’s hus- 
da teibl. hu: a:skt dem ta sit daun? deiziz hAZ- 
band asked them to sit down. What did they have 
band a:skt dem ta sit daun. hwot did dei heev 
first? First they had soup. What is soup made from? 
fa:st? fa:st dei heed su:p. hwot iz su:p meid from? 
It is made from vegetables, and sometimes it is also 
it iz meid from ved^itablz, and SAmtaimz it iz o.lsou 
made from meat; but the meat is not in the soup when 
meid from mi:t; bAt da mi:t iz not in da su:p hwen 
you get it for dinner; it has been taken out again. It 
ju: get it fo: dina; it heez bi:n teikn aut a'gein . it 
is made 
was made 
has been made 
How is soup 
made? = How do 
you make soup? 
How was the soup 
made? = How did 
you make the 
soup? 
How has the soup 
been made? = 
How have you 
made the soup? 
you (here) = 
people 
161 
Chapter Nineteen (19). 
maid 
was only put in to give the soup a good taste. Did the 
woz ounli put in td giv dd snip d gud teist. did dd 
soup taste good? Yes, Mrs. Hudson said that it tasted 
su:p teist gud? jes, misiz h\dsn sed ddt it teistid 
very good. Why was Daisy’s husband so hungry? 
veri gud. hwai woz deiziz liAzbond sou hxggri? 
Because he had had so much work to do that he had 
bi'koz hi: heed heed sou niAtf wd:k td du: ddt hi: heed 
had no time for lunch; he was so hungry that he ate 
heed nou taim fj: IahJ; hi: woz sou hAygri ddt hi: et 
two plates of soup. 
tu: pleits dv su:p. 
He cuts, he cut, 
he has cut 
Then the maid came in with a large dish. On the dish 
den dd meid keim in wid d la:d$ dij. jn dd dif 
was beef. Daisy’s husband cut the beef with a big 
wjz bi:f. deiziz hAzbdnd kAt dd bi:f wid 3 big 
one knife 
two knives 
knife, and then put a piece on each plate. Daisy put 
naif, dnd den put d pi:s on i:tj pleit. deizi put 
potatoes and vegetables on the plates and gave one plate 
pd'teitouz dnd vedytoblz on dd pleits dnd geiv wau pleit 
to each of the guests. “Will you give me the salt, 
tu i:tj dv dd gests. “wil ju: giv mi: dd so.lt, 
please,” said Mrs. Hudson to Mrs. Smith. “I like salt 
pli:z, 33 sed misiz hAdsn to misiz smip. “ai laik so:It 
both in the soup and with the meat.” With the beef 
boup in dd su:p dnd wid do mi:t.” wid dd bi:f 
they had wine. Daisy’s husband poured wine into the 
dci heed wain. deiziz hAzbdnd po:d wain intd dd 
162 
The Nineteenth (19th) Chapter. 
glasses from a big bottle, and when he had tasted it, 
gla.siz from a big batl, and hwen hi: heed teistid it, 
he said, “Oh, it would make a new and better man of 
hi: sed, “on, it wud meik a njn: and beta man av 
me to have such a glass of wine every day. Water is 
mi: ta hcev SAtf a gla:s av wain evri dei. wa:ta iz 
good to drink for people who are thirsty, but wine is 
gud ta driyk fa: pi:pi hu: a: pe:sti, b\t wain iz 
better.” Then they had ice-cream, and when they had 
beta ” den dei heed 'ais'kri.m, and hwen dei heed 
gone into the sitting-room, a cup of coffee was ready 
gan inta da sitiyrurm, a k\p av kafi waz redi 
there for each of the guests. 
dea fa: i:tj av da gests. 
Who came into the dining-room with the dishes? The 
hu: keim inta da dainiyrw.m wid da difizf da 
maid came into the dining-room with the dishes. Is 
meid keim inta da dainiyru.m wid da difiz. iz 
there a maid in every home? No, it is only people 
dea a meid in evri houmf nou, it iz ounli pi:pl 
with big houses where there is much work to do, who 
wid big hauziz hwea dear iz mxtf wa:k ta du:, hu: 
have maids. Who cut the beef? Daisy’s husband cut 
hcev meidz. hu: k\t da bi:f? deiziz h\zband k\t 
the beef. What do people use knives for? A knife is 
da, bi:f. hwat du: pi:pi ju:z naivz fa:? a naif iz 
used to cut the food into pieces before it is put into 
ju:zd ta k\t da fu:d inta pi:siz bi'fa: it iz put inta 
163 
Chapter Nineteen (19). 
is used 
are used 
A pencil is used to 
write with. 
Pencils are used to 
write with. 
is called 
are called 
The boy Is called 
John. 
The small spoons 
are called tea¬ 
spoons. 
for instance = 
for example 
the mouth. Do they use knives to put the food into 
do maup. du: dei ju:s naive td put dd fu:d into 
their mouths? No, they use forks; a fork is used to put 
dee maudsf nou, dei ju:s fo:ks; dfj:k is ju:sd td put 
the food into the mouth. Do people also use forks when 
dd fu:d intd dd maup. du: pi:pl o:lsou ju:s fo:ks hwen 
they eat soup? No, then they use spoons; a spoon is 
dei i:t su:pf nou, den dei ju:z spu:ns; d spu:n is 
used for soup. Spoons are also used to put sugar in tea 
ju:zd fo: su:p. spurns a: odsou ju:zd td put fugd in ti: 
or coffee; but they are smaller than the spoons which 
o: kofi; b\t dei a: smodo deen dd spu:nz hwitj 
are used for soup, and they are called teaspoons. 
a: ju:sd fo: su:p, dnd dei a: kodd ti:spu:nz. 
What do people drink when they are thirsty? They 
hwot du: pi:pi dritjk hwen dei a: pe.sti? dei 
drink water, but sometimes, for instance at parties, they 
drirjk wo: to, b\t SAmtaimz, for instons cet pa:tiz f dei 
drink wine. Who took the bottle and poured wine into 
driyk wain. hu: tuk do botl end po:d wain into 
the glasses? Daisy’s husband took the bottle and poured 
do gla:siz? deiziz h\zbond tuk do botl end po:d 
the wine into the glasses. What did the guests have 
do wain into do gla:siz. hwot did do gests hcev 
after the beef? They had ice-cream. What did they 
a:fto do bi:ff dei heed 'ais'kri:m. hwot did dei 
have in the sitting-room? They had a cup of coffee. 
hcev in do sitirjru.m? dei heed $ k\p ov kofi. 
164 
The Nineteenth (19th) Chapter. 
After the coffee the guests had a good, long talk 
a:ftd da kafi da gests heed a gud, lay ta:k 
together. Mrs. Smith talked to Daisy about her three 
ta'geda. misiz smip ta:kt ta deizi a'baut ha: pri: 
children, and Daisy's husband had a good talk with 
tjildran, and deiziz hAzband heed a gud to:k wid 
Mrs. Hudson about his work. Later in the evening they 
misiz h\dsn a'baut hiz wa:k. leita in di i:vniy dei 
had birthday chocolate. “Oh, I have eaten so much for 
heed ba.pdei tfakalit. “ou, ai hcev i:tn sou m\tj fa: 
dinner,” Daisy's husband said, “must I have chocolate, 
dina” deiziz hAzband sed, “mAst ai hcev tfakalit, 
too?” Daisy: “It is my birthday, and you must have 
tu: f” deizi: (( it iz mai ba:pdei, and ju: mASt hav 
chocolate, too.” When it was almost eleven o'clock, 
tfakalit, tu:” hwen it waz a.lmoust i'levn a'klak, 
Mrs. Smith said, “How late it is! Now I must go home. 
misiz smip sed, “hau leit it iz! nau ai mAst gou houm. 
It has been a very pleasant evening, Daisy. It was so 
it hcez bi:n a veri pleznt i:vniy, deizi. it waz sou 
pleasant to be together again.” “Yes, I was glad to see 
pleznt ta bi: ta'geda a'gein.” “jes, ai waz glced ta si: 
you again, too.” 
ju: a'gein, tu:” 
What did the guests do after the coffee? After the 
hwat did da gests du: a:fta da kafif a:fta da 
to talk = to speak 
We talk together. 
Can you speak 
English? 
coffee the guests had a long talk together. 
kafi da gests heed a lay ta:k ta'geda. 
What did 
hwat did 
165 
Chapter Nineteen (19). 
Mrs. Smith talk to Daisy about? She talked to Daisy 
misiz smip ta:k ta deizi a'baut? fi: ta:kt ta deizi 
about her own children. Did the guests have a pleasant 
a'baut ha: oun tfildran. did da gests hav a pleznt 
evening at Daisy’s home? Yes, they had a very pleasant 
i:vniy at deiziz houmf jes, dei had a veri pleznt 
evening, and Mrs. Smith told Daisy that it had been 
i.vniy, and misiz smip tould deizi dat it had bi:n 
so good to see her. 
sou gud ta si: ha:. 
WORDS: 
EXERCISE A. 
down 
sit 
sat 
soup 
taste 
(to) taste 
plate 
hungry 
work 
maid 
dish 
cut 
knife 
salt 
wine 
pour 
glass 
thirsty 
ice-cream 
fork 
use 
Daisy’s husband came — from the first floor. He said, 
“— sit — at the table. Will you please-on that 
chair?” — is made from vegetables and sometimes 
from meat, too. Mrs. Hudson said that the soup — 
good; it had a good —. Daisy’s husband was so — that 
he ate two — of soup. He had had much — to do that 
day. The — came in with a dish. On the — was beef. 
Knives are used to — with. You cut your food into 
pieces with a —. A fork is — to put the food into 
the mouth. When you eat soup, you do not use a —, 
but a —. With the beef the guests had —. Daisy’s 
husband — the wine into the — from a big —. People 
drink water when they are —. You put sugar in 
coffee with a —. People drink — from glasses. 
Did the guests have more than — and beef for dinner? 
Yes, they also had —. Did the guests — together after 
the coffee? Yes, they had a long — together; Mrs. Smith 
166 
The Nineteenth (19th) Chapter. 
talked to Daisy — her three children. Did the guests 
have a — evening at Daisy’s home? Yes, they had a 
very — evening. 
EXERCISE B. 
What is soup made from? ... Why was Daisy’s husband 
so hungry that day? ... How many plates of soup did 
he eat? ... What do people drink wine from? ... Did 
the soup have a good taste? ... Who came in with the 
dishes? ... What are knives used for? ... What are forks 
used for? ... What do people eat soup with? ... Did the 
guests have more than soup and beef for dinner? . . . 
When did they talk together? ... Was it late when Mrs. 
Smith went home?... Had it been a pleasant evening? ... 
spoon 
teaspoon 
bottle 
talk 
(to) talk 
pleasant 
cup 
about 
instance 
167 
Chapter Twenty (20). 
The Twentieth (20th) Chapter. 
AT THE RESTAURANT 
happy = glad 
dress = frock 
late 
later 
latest 
On the evening when Mrs. Smith went to her friend’s 
on di i.vniy hwen misiz smip went td ha: frendz 
birthday party, Mr. Smith took the children to a res- 
ba:pdei pa:ti, mista smip tuk da tfildran tu a res¬ 
taurant for dinner. It was the first time that the 
tar ant jo: dina. it woz da fa:st taim dat da 
children had been to a restaurant, and they were very 
tfildran heed bi:n tu a restar ant, and dei wa: veri 
happy to go. Before they went, their father had to 
hcepi ta gou. bi'fo: dei went, dea fa:da heed ta 
see that they put on their best clothes. “Tell Helen 
si: dat dei put on dea best kloudz. “tel helin 
to put on her new green dress,” he said to John, “and 
ta put on ha: nju: gri:n dres,” hi: sed ta dyn, “and 
you can put on your new suit with the grey stripes.” 
ju: keen put on jua nju: sju:t wid da grei straips” 
A little later Mr. Smith went up to see if the children 
a litl leita mista smip went Ap ta si: if da tfildran 
were ready, and then he saw that Helen had not put 
wa: redi, and den hi: so: dat helin heed not put 
on her green dress. “Did you not tell her to put it on?” 
on ha: gri:n dres. “did ju: not tel ha: ta put it on?” 
168 
The Twentieth (20th) Chapter. 
he asked John. “Yes, I told her what you said, but 
hi:. a:skt d$on. “jes, ai tould hd: hzvot ju: sed, hAt 
she said that the last time she had that dress on, she 
fi: sed ddt da la:st taim fi: heed deet dres on, ji: 
dropped some ice-cream on it, and now there is a spot 
dr opt s\m 'ais'kri:m on it, ,and nau dear iz a spot 
where the ice-cream has been.” “Oh, is there a spot on 
hwea di 'ais'kri:m hcez bi:n” “ou, iz dea a spot on 
the dress? Well, then she must put on another dress.” 
da dres? wel, den fi: m\st put on a'n\da dres” 
“No, come here, Helen,” said Aunt Jane, who had come 
“nou, k\m hia, helin,” sed a:nt d^ein, hu: heed k\m 
to look after the baby, “I shall take the spot away with 
ta luk a:fta da beibi, “ai feel teik da spot a'wei wid 
some hot water. There, now it is gone, and you can gone = away 
saw hot wo:ta. dea, nau it iz gon, and ju: keen 
be happy again. Oh, look, Baby has dropped her doll 
bi: heepi a'gein. ou, luk, beibi hcez dr opt ha: dol 
on the floor; will you pick it up for me? I am too old 
on da flo:; wil ju: pik it Ap fo: mi:? ai eem tu: ould 
don’t = do not 
to pick things up from the floor. Don’t give it to the 
ta pik piyz Ap from da flo:. dount giv it ta da 
baby, Helen; it is not clean, now it has been on the 
beibi, helin; it iz not kli:n, nau it hcez bi:n on da 
floor; we must wash it first. I shall have to tie it to 
flo:; mi: mAst wof it fa:st. ai feel hcev ta tai it ta 
string 
her bed with a piece of string so that she can’t drop it can’t — cannot 
ha: bed zvid a pi:s av strifj sou dot fi: ka:nl drop it 
169 
Chapter Twenty (20). 
Have you got a 
penny? = Have 
you a penny? 
I’ll = I shall 
you’ll = you will 
he’ll = he will 
she’ll = she will 
it’ll = it will 
we’ll = we shall 
you’ll = you will 
they’ll = they 
will 
ourselves 
yourselves 
Something for 
ourselves. 
Something for 
yourselves. 
We wash our¬ 
selves. 
Wash yourselves, 
John and Helen! 
car 
as = because 
on the floor. Have you got a piece of string, Helen?” 
on ba flo:. hcev ju: got 9 pi:s dv striy, helin?” 
“No, Aunt Jane, but I know where there is some string. 
“nou, a:nt dyin, b\t ai nou hwea bear iz saw striy. 
Mamma has always got some string in the kitchen. 
ma'ma: hcez o:lwiz got saw, striy in bd kit Jon. 
I’ll go and get it for you.” “Thank you, my dear, you 
ail gou and get it fo: ju:” “ pceyk ju:, mai did, ju: 
are a very good little girl.” 
a: d veri gud litl ga:l.” 
“Let me look at you now, children. John, you have not 
(C let mi: luk cet ju: nau, tjildran. dyn, ju: hcev not 
tied your shoe-laces. Can’t such a big boy tie his own 
taid jud judeisiz. ka:nt SAtf a big boi tai hiz oun 
shoe-laces? Well, now you look fine, both of you. Here 
fu:leisizf wel, nau ju: luk fain, boup av ju:. hiar 
is a shilling to buy something good for yourselves, my 
iz a jiliy ta bai SAmpiy gud fo: jua'selvz, mai 
dears. Good-bye, now!” “Good-bye, Aunt Jane, and 
diaz. gud'bai, nau!” “gud'bai, a:nt dyin, and 
thank you for the money! We’ll buy chocolate for 
pceyk ju: fo: ba mAni! wi:l bai tfokalit fo: 
ourselves, and something good for Alice, too.” 
aua'selvz, and sAmpiy gud fo: celis, tu:” 
Mr. Smith wanted the children to have a good time 
mist a smip wontid ba tjildran ta hcev a gud taim 
that evening, and as the children liked very much to 
beet i:vniy, and cez ba tjildran laikt veri mAtf ta 
170 
The Twentieth (20th) Chapter. 
ride in a car, he called a taxi. They rode for only ten 
raid in a ka:, hi: ka:ld a tceksi. dei roud fa: ounli ten 
minutes in the taxi, but if they had ridden in a tram, 
minits in dd tceksi, b\t if dei heed ridn in a treem, 
it would have taken them half an hour to get to the 
it wud hcev teikn dem ha:f an aua ta get ta da 
restaurant. The restaurant was one to which Mr. Smith 
restar ant. da restar ant waz w\n ta hwitf mist a smip 
often went when he had to have a meal in town. He 
a:fn went hwen hi: heed ta hcev a mi:l in taun. hi: 
had been there so often that the waiters knew his 
heed bi:n dea sou a:fn dat da weitaz nju: hiz 
name. 
neim. 
“Good evening, Mr. Smith,” said one of the waiters 
“gud i.vnirj, mist a smip, 93 sed w\n av da weitaz 
when they came into the restaurant, ‘Til find you a 
hwen dei keim inta da restar ant, (e ail faind ju: a 
good table. What will you have for dinner?” “What 
gud teibl. hwat wil ju: hcev fa: dinaf" (e hwat 
have you got?” “Well, let me see — we have some 
hcev ju: gat?" (C wel, let mi: si: — wi: hcev SAm 
very good mutton with cabbage, and a fine vegetable 
veri gud mxtn wid kcebid 3 , and a fain vedytabl 
soup.” Mr. Smith: “How would you like that, children?” 
su:p." mista smip: “hau wud ju: laik deet, tjildran?" 
“That would be fine, daddy.” “And what would you 
(C dcet wud bi: fain, deedi” “and hwat wud ju: 
He rides, he rode, 
he has ridden. 
waiter 
often = many 
times 
He knows, he 
knew, he has 
known. 
mutton = the 
meat of sheep 
cabbage 
daddy = father 
171 
Chapter Twenty (20). 
let's = let us 
couldn't = could 
not 
cinema 
wee = little 
it's = it is 
like for a sweet?” “Oh, an ice-cream!” “Let's have 
laik fo: a swi:t?” “ou, an 1 ais'krirm!” “lets hcev 
soup and mutton then, two ice-creams with fruit, and 
su:p and mAtn den, tu: 'ais'kri:mz wid fru:t, end 
a cup of coffee for me, waiter.” “Yes, thank you, sir.” 
a kAp av kofi fo: mi:, weita.” “jes, pceyk ju:, sa:” 
“Don't you want some more cabbage, John? Cabbage 
“dount ju: want SAin mo: kcebid^, dynf kcebid 3 
is good for you.” “Yes, thank you; let me have a little 
iz gud fo: ju:” “jes, pceyk ju:; let mi: hcev a litl 
more cabbage before we have the sweet.” 
mo: kcebid 3 bi'fo: mi: hcev da swi:t” 
“Well, children, have you had enough to eat? What 
(C wel, tjildran, hcev ju: heed i'nAf tu i:t? hwot 
shall we do now?” “Oh, daddy, couldn't we go to a 
feel wi: du: nauf” “ou, deedi, kudnt mi: gou tu a 
cinema and see a picture? There is a very good picture 
sinama and si: a piktja? dear iz a veri gud piktfa 
on at the ‘Nelson Cinema’. It is an old picture with 
on cet da *nelsn sinama 9 . it iz an ould piktja wid 
Shirley Temple, who played in ‘Wee Willie WinkieV' 
fa:li tempi, hu: pleid in *wi: wili wiyki 9 ” 
Mr. Smith: “It's your evening, and I want you to have 
mist a smip: “its jua i:vnitj, and ai wont ju: ta hcev 
a good time, so let us go and see that picture. At what 
a gud taim, sou let as gou and si: deet piktfa. cet hwot 
time does it begin?” “It begins at half past seven.” 
taint dAZ it bi'ginf” “it bi'ginz cet ha:f pa:st sevn.” 
172 
The Twentieth (20th) Chapter. 
“Then we must go now. Waiter, I want to pay the He pays, he paid, 
“den wi: mASt gou nau. weitd, ai wont td pei dd ^ as ^ ai ^‘ 
bill; how much is it, please?” “Twelve shillings and 
bil; hau mAtf iz it, pli:z?” “twelv filiyz and 
tenpence (12/10), sir.” “Here you are — and 
tenpans (twelv and ten), sa:” “hia ju: a: — and 
one and sixpence for yourself.” “Thank you, sir; shall 
wAn and sikspans fa: fua'self” “pceyk ju:, sa:; feel 
I get you a taxi?” “No, thank you, it’s not very far; 
ai get ju: a tceksi?” “nou, pceyk ju:, its not vert fa:; 
we’ll walk.” 
wi:l wa:k” 
At the Cinema. 
Mr. Smith to the lady at the booking-office: “Three 
mist a smip ta da leidi cet da bukiyafis: “pri: 
tickets, please!” The lady: “Are the two children with 
tikits, pli:z!” da leidi: “a: da tu: tfildran wid 
you, sir? Then you only have to pay half price for their 
ju:, sa:? den ju: ounli hcev ta pei ha:f prais fa: dea 
tickets. Three shillings and sixpence (3/6).” 
tikits. pri: jiliyz and sikspans (pri: and siks).” 
Mr. Smith paid for the tickets with a pound (£ 1) note. 
mist a smip peid fa: da tikits wid a pound nout. 
“Is it a good picture?” he asked when he picked up the 
“iz it a gud piktfa?” hi: a:skt hwen hi: pikt Ap da 
coins which she gave him. “Yes, very good,” she said. 
kainz hwitf ji: geiv him. (C jes, veri gud,” fi: sed. 
173 
Chapter Twenty (20). 
“All the children have been so happy to see it.” 
“a:l da tfildran heev bi:n sou heepi ta si: it” 
The children looked at the pictures on the walls near 
da tfildran lukt cat da piktfaz an da wa:lz nia 
the booking-office, and before they went into the cinema, 
da bukiyafis, and bi'fa: dei went inta da sinama, 
they went to the chocolate-shop to buy something with 
dei went ta da tfakalitfap ta bat SAmpiy wid 
their shilling. “Two pieces of milk-chocolate, please,” 
dea filiy. “tu: pi:siz av milktfakalit, pli:z” 
John said and gave the coin to the lady. “Here is your 
dyn sed and geiv da kain ta da leidi. “hiar iz jua 
chocolate,” she said, “that will be sixpence (6d).” 
tjakalit” fi: sed, “dcet wil bi: sikspans” 
They rode home in a taxi, and when they got home, 
dei roud houm in a tceksi, and hwen dei gat houm, 
John and Helen thanked their father for the good time 
dyn and helin peeykt dea fa:da fa: da gud taint 
they had had. They said it was the best time that they 
dei heed heed. dei sed it waz da best taim dat dei 
had had for a long time, and that it was much better 
heed heed fa: a lay taim, and dat it waz mAtf beta 
than to be with their mother at a birthday party for 
deen ta bi: wid dea mAda eet a ba:pdei pa:ti fa: 
ladies, who talked and talked all the evening. When 
leidiz, hu: ta:kt and ta:kt a:l di i.vniy. hwen 
they got home, Mrs. Smith had not yet come back from 
dei gat houm, misiz smip heed nat jet kAm beek fram 
174 
The Twentieth (20th) Chapter. 
the party. So Mr. Smith told the children to go up 
da pa:ti. sou mist a smip tould da tjildran ta gou \p 
to bed, and then he said: “Please ask Aunt Jane to 
ta bed, and den hi: sed: “pli:z a:sk a:nt d^ein ta 
come down. If you like, you can bring your night- 
k\m daun. if ju: laik, ju: keen briy jua nait- 
clothes down and dress for the night in the warm room. 
kloudz daun and dres fa: da nait in da wa:m ru:m. 
Aunt Jane and I will have a cup of tea now, and then 
a:nt dyin and ai wil hcev a k\p av ti: nau, and den 
you can tell her where we have been, and what we have 
ju: keen tel ha: hwea wi: hcev bi:n, and hwat wi: hcev 
seen. And then you can also give Aunt Jane this piece 
si:n. and den ju: keen a:lsou giv a:nt d$ein dis pi:s 
of chocolate that I have bought for her because she has 
av tfakalit dat ai hcev ba:t fa: ha: bfkaz fi: hcez 
looked after Baby to-night.” 
lukt a:fta beibi ta'nait” 
EXERCISE A. 
Mr. Smith and his children went to a — for dinner, 
and the children were very — to go. He told John 
that he should — Helen to put on her new green —. 
Later the father asked John if he had — Helen to do 
what he had said. Helen had — some ice-cream on her 
new frock, so that now there was a — on it. Aunt Jane 
was too old to — things up from the floor. She had to 
— the baby’s doll to the bed with a piece of —. John 
had not tied his —. “Buy something good for — 
WORDS: 
restaurant 
dress 
happy 
drop 
spot 
pick up 
tie 
string 
shoe-lace 
ourselves 
yourselves 
175 
Chapter Twenty (20). 
as 
ride 
rode 
ridden 
car 
taxi 
often 
waiter 
knew 
mutton 
cabbage 
daddy 
sweet 
cinema 
picture 
wee 
pay 
paid 
booking-office 
ticket 
note 
coin 
milk-chocolate 
chocolate-shop 
gone 
Aunt Jane said, and the children answered, “We shall 
buy chocolate for —, and something good for Alice, too.” 
Mr. Smith called a taxi, — the children liked very much 
to ride in a —. They — for ten minutes in the —. If 
they had — in a tram, it would have taken them much 
longer. Mr. Smith came so — to the restaurant that 
the — knew his name. The meat of sheep is called —. 
With the mutton they got —, and for a sweet they — 
ice-cream. Another word for father in English is —. 
Where — Mr. Smith and his children go at half past 
seven? They went to the ‘Nelson —’ to see an old 
— with Shirley Temple. How much did they — for 
the tickets? They — three shillings and sixpence for 
the —. What did Mr. Smith pay the lady at the — with? 
He paid her with a pound —. What did the children 
buy in the — with their money? They bought two 
pieces of —. 
EXERCISE B. 
Where did Mr. Smith and his children dine? ... What 
dress did Helen put on? ... What had Helen dropped 
on her new dress? ... What did Aunt Jane take the 
spot away with? ... What had Baby done with her 
doll? ... Did Mr. Smith and his children walk to the 
restaurant? ... Why did the waiters know Mr. Smith? 
... What did the father and his children have for dinner? 
... Where did they go after dinner? ... What did Mr. 
Smith ask the lady at the booking-office? ... What did 
the children buy with their shilling? ... Did the children 
have a good time? ... 
176 
Chapter Twenty-One (21). 
The Twenty-First (21st) Chapter. 
THE STUDY OF ENGLISH 
One winter evening in a small European town, three 
wah wintar i:vniy in a smo:l juara'pian taun, pri: 
young men came together in the home of one of their 
jAy men keim ta'geda in da houm av WAn av dear 
old teachers. They had not been taught English at 
ould ti'.tfaz. dei had not bi:n ta:t iygli / at 
school, and in their work they had seen many times 
sku:l, and in dea wa:k dei had si:n meni taimz 
that it would be a good thing for them to know some 
dat it wud bi: a gud piy fa: dam ta nou sAin 
English. So five months ago, they wrote a letter to 
iyglif. sou faiv mAnps a'gou, dei rout a let a ta 
one of the teachers of their old school and asked him 
WAn av da ti:tfaz av dear ould sku:l and a:skt him 
to teach them English. They knew that he had been to 
ta ti:tf dam iyglif. dei nju: dat hi: had bi:n tu 
England several times, and that he spoke the language 
iy gland sevral taimz, and dat hi: spouk da Iceygwid 3 
well. He was glad to hear that they were interested 
wel. hi: waz glced ta hia dat dei wa: intristid 
in English, and answered that he would like very much 
in iyglif, and a:nsad dat hi: wud laik veri wa// 
to teach them. They began their study of English 
ta ti:tf dam. dei bi'gcen dea stAdi av iyglif 
a European town 
= a town in 
Europe 
He teaches, 
he taught, 
he has taught 
[t\:tjiz, to:t, to:t]. 
several times = 
more than one 
time 
He speaks, 
he spoke, 
he has spoken 
[spi:ks, spouk, 
spouk on]. 
6/1 
177 
Chapter Twenty-One (21). 
twics = two times 
were to come = 
should come 
once = one time 
end of book, 
to be asleep= 
to sleep 
four months ago, and had come to the house of their 
fo: mAnps a'gou, and had k\m ta da haus av dea 
teacher several times every week, sometimes twice a 
ti:tfa sevral taimz evri wi:k, SAmtaimz twais a 
week and sometimes three times a week. If they were to 
wi:k and SAmtaimz pri: taimz a wi:k. if dei wa: ta 
come only once a week, it would take too long to learn 
kA m ounli WAns a wi:k, it wud teik tu: loy ta la:n 
English. They had read about the Smith family and 
iyglif. dei had red a'baut da smip fcemili and 
were almost at the end of the book. 
wa: o.lmoust at di end av da buk. 
Now the young men were in their teacher’s sitting-room, 
nau da jAtj men wa: in dea ti:tjaz sitiyrum, 
ready to begin their studies. They were alone at first, 
redi ta bigin dea stAdiz. dei wa: a'lonn at fa:st, 
but at ten minutes past eight their teacher came in. 
bAt at ten minits pa:st eit dea ti:tja keim in. 
“Good evening, boys,” he said when he came in; “I am 
“gud i:vniy, boiz” hi: sed hwen hi: keim in; “ai am 
a little late to-night. I had to put my little son to bed, 
a litl leit ta'nait. ai heed ta put mai litl SAn ta bed, 
because my wife is not at home, and I had to wait 
bikoz mai waif iz not at houm, and ai heed ta weit 
until he was asleep, or he would call all the time.” 
An'til hi: waz a'sli:p, o: hi: wud ko:l o:l da taim.” 
“I have never seen your son,” said one of the young 
“ai hav neva si:n jo: SAn,” sed wah av da ]ay) 
178 
The Twenty-First (21st) Chapter. 
men; “couldn't we go and have a look at him?” “Yes,” 
men; “kudnt wi: gou and hcev d luk at himf” “jes,” 
the teacher answered, “but we shall have to be quiet. 
da ti.tfar a: ns ad, “bAt wi: jal hcev ta bi: kwaiat. 
If we make a noise, he will wake up from his sleep, 
if wi: meik a naiz, hi: wil weik Ap fram hiz sli:p, 
and then it will be a long time before he goes to sleep 
and den it wil bi: a by taim bi'fj: hi: gouz ta sli:p 
again.” 
a'gein” 
So they went up into the bedroom to have a look at 
sou dei went Ap inta da bedrum ta hcev a luk at 
the sleeping child. “He is very quiet now, because 
da sli'.piy tfaild. “hi: iz veri kwaiat nau, bi'koz 
he is sleeping,” the teacher said when they came down 
hi: iz sli'.piy , 93 da ti:tfa sed hwen dei keim daun 
again, “but when he is awake, he makes a great noise 
a'gein, “bAt hwen hi: iz a'weik, hi: meiks a greit noiz 
all the time. I must go up now and then to see that 
o:l da taim. ai mAst gou Ap nau and den ta si: dat 
he is warm enough, because my wife says that he is 
hi: iz wo:m i'nAf, bi'kaz mai waif sez dat hi: iz 
beginning a cold. He is sleeping in our room to-night, 
bi'giniy a kould. hi: iz sli'.piy in aua ru:m ta'nait, 
but when he is well, he always sleeps in his own room ... 
bAt hwen hi: iz wel, hi: o:lwaz sli:ps in hiz oun ru:rn . . . 
Well, let us go back to our studies. You know that 
wel, let as gou bcek tu aua stAdiz. ju: nou dat 
He wakes, 
he woke, 
he has waked 
[weiks, wotik, 
weikt]. 
great = big 
now and then = 
from time to time 
The child sleeps 
every night. 
The child is 
sleeping now. 
179 
Chapter Twenty-One (21). 
The girl has a 
smile on her face; 
she has a smiling 
face; she is 
smiling now. She 
often smiles. 
He learns, he 
learned, he has 
learned = he 
learns, he learnt, 
he has learnt 
[la:nz, h:nt, hint]. 
parents always talk too much about their children,” the. 
pearants a:lwaz ta:k tu: mAtf a'baut dee tfildran, 33 da 
teacher said with a smile on his face. “Oh, that is all 
ti:tfa sed wid a smail on hiz feis. “ou, dcet iz e:l 
right,” one of the young men answered, smiling. 
rait,” wau av da ]ay} men a: used, smailiy. 
An hour later, they got to the end of the last exercise 
an aua leita, dei got ta di end av da la:st eksasaiz 
about the Smith family. They had given the answers 
a'baut da smip fcemili. dei had givn di arnsez 
to all the questions in the exercises except the last one, 
tu a:l da kwestjanz in di eksasaiziz ik'sept da la:stwAn, 
and now the teacher asked one of the young men the 
and nau da ti.tfar a:skt WAn av da ]Afj men da 
last question, “Did the children have a good time?” 
la:st kwestfan, “did da tfildran hcev a gud taim?” 
The young man gave the answer: “Yes, they had the 
da jAy moen geiv di a:nsa: “jes, dei heed da 
best time they had had for a long time.” “That is 
best taim dei had heed far a lay taim. 33 “dcet iz 
right,” said the teacher, “and now I want to talk to 
rait, 39 sed da ti:tfa, “end nau ai want ta ta:k ta 
you about something new. You have learnt English 
ju: a'baut SAinpiy nju:. ju: hev le:nt iyglif 
now for four months, and you already know many 
nau fa fa: mAnps, and ju: a:l'redi nou meni 
words. Sometimes we speak English together, but from 
wa:dz. SAmtaimz ivi: spi:k iyglif ta'gede, bAt fram 
180 
The Twenty-First (21st) Chapter. 
now on I want you to speak English always when we 
nau on ai wont ju: td spi:k iyglij o:lwdZ hwen wi: 
do our study work. How do you like that idea?” “It 
du: aus stAdi wd:k. hau du: ju: laik dcet at did? 33 “it 
is a good idea, and I like it very much,” one of the young 
iz d gud at did, and ai laik it veri mAtf, 33 wau 3V d3 jAfj 
men answered, and the others also said that the idea 
men a: ns 3d, snd di Addz o:lsou sed d3t di at did 
was good. “It would be a good idea to begin now, 
W3z gud. “it wud bi: 3 gud at did t3 hi gin nau, 
to-night,” the teacher said. “I will try to put the 
td'nait, 33 d3 ti:tfd sed. “ai wil trai t3 put d3 
words together in such a way that you will be able to 
W3:dz td'gedd in SAtf 3 wei d3t ju: wil bi: eibl tu 
understand the new words, and if you do not understand 
Atidd'stcend dd nju: W3:dz, dnd if ju: du: not Andd'stcend 
what a word means, just ask me what the meaning of 
hwot 3 W3:d mi:nz, d$Ast a:sk mi: hwot dd mi:niy 3v 
it is, and I will explain it to you in some other way, 
it iz, 3nd ai ml iks'plein it t3 ju: in SAm Add wei, 
speaking English all the time. — Did you understand 
spi'.kig iyglif o:l dd taim. — did ju: Andd'stcend 
everything I said now?” “Yes, we understood every 
evripiy ai sed nau? 33 “jes, wi: And 3 'stud evri 
word, also the new words.” 
wd.d, o:lsou dd nju: ws:dz. 33 
One of the young men: “I have a good idea! It would 
WAn 3V dd jAy men: “ai hcev 3 gud at did! it wud 
He understands, 
he understood, 
he has understood 
[ a ndd'stands, 
a ndo'stud, 
a nda'stud]. 
It means, it meant, 
it has meant 
[mi:ns, ment, ment]. 
6/2 
181 
Chapter Twenty-One (21). 
He feels, he felt, 
he has felt 
[fids, felt , felt]. 
be much better to use English names when we speak 
bi: niAtf beta td ju:z iyglif neimz hwen wi: spi:k 
English.” “Yes,” the teacher answered; “the English 
iyglij” “jes,” da ti:tjar a: ns ad; “di iyglif 
word for my name would be Miller, and your name 
wa:d fa tnai neim wud bi: mil a, and jo: neim 
would be Brown.” “Tell us the English words for our 
wud bi: braun.” “tel as di iyglif zva:dz far ana 
names, too,” the other young men asked the teacher. 
neimz, tu:,” di Ada jAy men a:skt da ti:tja. 
“Your name,” he said to one of them, “would be Storm, 
“jo: neim” hi: sed ta zvAn av dam, “wud bi: sto:m, 
and your name,” he said to the other, “would be Wood. 
and jo: neim,” hi: sed ta di Ada, “wud bi: wud. 
It is a good idea; from to-night we will all be English 
it iz a gud ai'dia; fram ta'nait wi: zvil o:l bi: iyglif 
people twice a week.” “I am already beginning to feel 
pi:pi twais a zvi:k ” “ai am o:l'redi bi'giniy ta fi:l 
very English,” Brown said. “Well, the name is not 
veri iyglif, yy braun sed. “wel, da neim iz not 
enough for me to feel English,” said Wood; “I shall 
i y nAf fa mi: ta fi:l iyglif, 33 sed wud; “ai fal 
have to hear my new name several times before I can 
hcev ta hia mai nju: neim sevral taimz bi'fo: ai kan 
remember who Mr. Wood is. I am writing it down in 
ri'memba hu: mist a wud iz. ai am raitiy it daun in 
my book now to remember my new name. What is it, 
mai buk nau ta ri'memba mai nju: neim. hwot iz it, 
182 
The Twenty-First (21st) Chapter. 
Storm, why are you so quiet?” “I am just trying to 
sto:m, hwai a: ju: sou kwaiatf” “cii am d^Ast traiiy ta 
remember my new name, too.” “When you have heard 
ri'memba mai nju: neim, tu:.” “hwen ju: hav ha:d 
it three or four times, you will not forget it,” said 
it pri: o: fa: taimz, ju: wil not fa'get it,” sed 
Mr. Miller. 
mista mila. 
He forgets, he 
forgot, he has 
forgotten Ifa'gets, 
fa'got, fa'gotn]. 
“You have forgotten that you have been asked to look 
“ju: hav fa'gotn dat ju: hav bi:n a:skt ta luk 
after the boy, Mr. Miller; he is calling you now,” said 
a:fta da boi, mista mila; hi: iz ko:liy ju: nau,” sed 
Brown. “Oh, and my wife is coming in through the 
braun. “on, and mai waif iz kAiniy in pru: da 
garden now; what will she say when she finds the boy 
ga:dn nau; Jnvot wil fi: sei hwen fi: faindz da boi 
awake? I shall have to explain to her that we had 
a'weik? ai fal hcev tu iks'plein ta ha: dat wi: heed 
so much to talk about to-night that we forgot him. 
sou niAtf ta to:k a'baut ta'nait dat wi: fa'got him. 
I hope he will go to sleep again and have a good sleep 
ai houp hi: wil gou ta sli:p a'gein and hcev a gud sli:p 
all night. Last night he woke up three times.” 
o:l nait. la:st nait hi: wouk Ap pri: taimz” 
“I want to ask you a question,” Storm said to the others 
“aizvont tu a:sk ju: a kwestfan” sto:m sed ta di \daz 
when the teacher had gone up to the boy. “What does 
hzven da ti:tfa had gon Ap ta da boi. “hwot d.\z 
183 
Chapter Twenty-One (21). 
the word ‘explain’ mean? I did not like to ask the 
da wa:d € iks'plein y mi:nf ai did nat laik tu a:sk da 
teacher about it, because I could see that you two 
ti.tfar a'baut it, bi'kaz ai kud si: dat ju: tu: 
understood it.” “Yes, I understood it,” Wood answered; 
Anda'stud it” “jes, ai Anda'stud it ” wild a:nsad; 
“it means to give the meaning of something, or to tell 
“it mi:nz ta giv da mi: nit) av s Am pit), a: ta tel 
why something is done, or how it is done.” “Oh yes; 
hwai SAmpirj iz dAn , j: hau it iz dAti” “ou jes; 
when you say it in this way, I understand what it 
hwen ju: sei it in dis wei, ai Anda'stcend hwat it 
means. Thank you!” 
mi:nz. pcerjk ju:!” 
When Mr. Miller came down again, he said to the young 
hwen mista mila keim daun a'gein, hi: sed ta da jAt) 
men, “I hope you will have a cup of coffee with us. 
men t “ai houp ju: zvil hcev a kAp av kafi wid as. 
My wife has already made the coffee and is now putting 
mai waif haz ad'redi meid da kafi and iz mu putirj 
the cups on the table. She will be interested to hear 
da kAps an da teibl. fi: wil bi: intristid ta Jtia 
you speak English, because she has been to England 
ju: spi:k iyglif, bi'kaz fi: haz bi:n tu itjgland 
with me several times and speaks the language very 
wid mi: sevral taimz and spi:ks da laygwid 3 veri 
well.” “I don’t feel hungry,” said Wood; “but I would 
wel” “ai dount fi:l hAtjgri” sed wud; “bAt ai wud 
184 
The Twenty-First (21st) Chapter. 
like a cup of coffee and a talk with your wife about the 
laik a kxp dv kofi and a to:k wid jo: waif a'baut da 
language we are all so interested in.” 
Iceygwid 3 wi: a: o:l son intristid in” 
EXERCISE A. 
The three young men — to their old teacher five 
months — and asked him to — them English. The 
teacher had been to England — times and was very 
much interested in English. His wife was also — in 
English. 
The teacher said it would be a good — for them to 
speak English together when they did their — work. 
Would they be able to — the new words? Yes, the 
teacher would put the words together in such a — 
that they would understand the — of all the words. 
If there should be a word now and — that they did 
not understand, the teacher would — the meaning of 
it in English. 
Could Mr. Wood — his new name? No, he said that 
he would — it if he did not write it down in his book. 
Had Mr. Miller remembered that he had been asked 
to — after his boy? No, he had — it. Was the 
teacher’s boy — when he was awake? No, he always 
made a great — when he was —; he was only quiet 
when he was —. Did Wood — hungry? No, but he 
would — to have a cup of coffee. 
WORDS: 
European 
teach 
taught 
several 
interested 
very much 
twice 
once 
end 
at first 
asleep 
quiet 
noise 
wake 
woke 
waked 
awake 
great 
now and then 
smile 
smile (verb) 
exercise 
already 
idea 
understand 
understood 
meant 
185 
Chapter Twenty-One (21). 
meaning 
explain 
feel 
felt 
remember 
forget 
forgot 
forgotten 
study 
look 
way 
question 
answer 
spoke 
spoken 
sleep 
learnt 
speak — 
speaking 
call — 
calling 
sleep — 
sleeping 
try — trying 
begin — 
beginning 
put — putting 
smile — 
smiling 
come — 
coming 
write — 
writing 
Miller 
Brown 
Storm 
Wood 
EXERCISE B. 
What did the young men write to their teacher? ... 
When did they write to him? ... What did he answer 
them? ... Why were they interested in English? ... 
How many times a week did they come to their teacher’s 
house for study? ... What idea did the teacher get? ... 
Who got the idea that they should use English names? 
... Did they feel that they could remember their new 
names? ... Did Storm understand everything the teacher 
said to them in English? ... What did he do to get the 
meaning of the word ‘explain’? ... Did the teacher’s 
boy wake up that evening? ... Was the teacher’s wife 
at home when they were at their studies? ... 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with ‘where’. 
Where is London? Answer ... New question ...? Paris 
is in France. Where is John? Answer ... Question ...? 
Helen is at school. Where were John and Helen when 
their mother called them? Answer ... Question ...? 
Daisy’s husband was on the first floor when the guests 
came. Where does the Smith family live? Answer ... 
Question ...? Mr. Smith’s brother lives in the country. 
Where do the Swedes live? Answer ... Question ...? 
The Norwegians live in Norway. Where did George 
and John go with their skates? Answer ... Question 
...? Mr. Smith went to a restaurant with the children. 
Where did they go after they had dined at the restau¬ 
rant? Answer ... Question ...? After they had been to 
the cinema, they went home. Where did Mrs. Smith get 
twelve pounds to buy a new frock? Answer ... Question 
...? They got their shilling from their Aunt Jane. 
186 
Chapter Twenty-Two (22). 
The Twenty-Second (22nd) Chapter. 
A GOOD IDEA 
Our three young friends have come to their teacher’s 
aud pri: jAy frendz hdv kAm td ded ti:tjdz 
house again to learn English. They have been working 
haus d'gein td h:n iyglif. dei hdv bi:n wd.’kiy 
at their studies for an hour and are now having a cup 
dt ded stAdiz fdr dn aud dnd a: nan hceviy d kAp 
of coffee. 
dv kdfi . 
Brown: “Mr. Miller, this evening when I was walking 
braun: “mistd mild, dis i.vniy hwen ai Wdz wo:kiy 
home from work, I thought of the idea you told us 
houm frdm wd:k, ai po:t dv di at did ju: tould as 
about the other evening, to speak nothing but English 
d'baut di Add i.vniy, td spi:k tiApiy bAt iyglif 
when we are together. I said to myself that when 
hwen wi: a: td'gebd. ai sed td matself ddt hwen 
the four of us have talked English for some time, it 
dd fo:r dv as hdv to:kt iyglif fd SAm taim, it 
would be a good thing to try to talk to some English 
wud bi: d gud piy td trai td to:k td sam iyglif 
people. ‘But where do you find English people to talk 
pi:pi. ‘bAt hwed du: ju: faind iyglif pi:pi td td:k 
to?* I asked myself. I couldn’t think of an answer to 
tu? y ai a:skt matself . ai kudnt piyk dv dn a:nsd td 
but (here) = 
except 
187 
Chapter Twenty-Two (22). 
that question at once; but when I was sitting at supper, 
deet kwestfdn at wayis; b\t hwen ai waz sitiy at SApa, 
I thought of this idea, ‘Why not make a trip to England? 
ai po:t av dis ai'dia, ‘hwai rut meik a trip tu iygland? 
Then there would be enough English people to talk to!’ 
den dea wud bi: i'nAf iyglif pi:pi ta to:k tu! 9 
What do you think of that idea?” 
hwot du: ju: piyk av dcet ai'dia?” 
Mr. Miller: “I think it would be a very good idea if 
mist a mila: “ai piyk it wud bi: a veri gud ai'dia if 
you could all make a trip to England together.” Storm: 
ju: kud o:l meik a trip tu iy gland ta'geda.” sto:m: 
“I have another question to ask you, Mr. Miller. Do you 
“ai hcev a'nAda kwestjan tu a:sk ju:, mist a mila. du: ju: 
think that you could come with us yourself?” Wood: 
piyk dat ju: kud kAin wid as ja:'self?” wud: 
“Yes, you know England and the English so well; but 
“jes, ju: nou iy gland and di iyglif sou wel; bAt 
perhaps you do not want to go to England again, 
pa'keeps ju: du: not wont ta gou tu iy gland a'gein, 
because you have been there so many times already?” 
bi'koz ju: hav bi:rt dea sou meni taimz o:l'redi?” 
one wife, 
two wives 
Mr. Miller: “Perhaps, and perhaps not. I shall have 
mist a mila: “pa'keeps, and pa'keeps not. ai fal keev 
to think more about it. You know I have a wife and 
ta piyk mo:r a'baut it. ju: nou ai keev a waif and 
a child to think of! But you have no wives to think of 
a tfaild ta piyk ov! bAt ju: keev nou waivz ta piyk ov 
188 
The Twenty-Second (22nd) Chapter. 
yet. As you said yourself, Wood, I have made many 
jet. az ju: sed j a:'self, wud, ai hav meid meni 
trips to England, so there are few places where I have 
trips tu iy gland, sou dear a: fju: pleisiz hwear ai hav 
not been before, but, on the other hand, it is several 
nat bi:n bi'fa:, bAt, an di Ada hcend, it iz sevral 
years since I was there last time, and since then many 
jiaz sins ai waz dea la:st taim, and sins den meni 
things have changed, that is, they are not the same 
piyz hav tfeind^d, dcet iz, dei a: nat da seim 
now as they were then. You know that most people 
nau az dei wa: den. ju: nou dat moust pi:pi 
think that the English are very conservative, that is, 
piyk dat di iyglif a: veri kan'sa:vativ, dcet iz, 
they like old ideas better than modern ones, and are 
dei laik ould ai'diaz beta dan madan wahz, and a: 
not glad to change things. I do not think that people 
nat glced ta tjeind j pirjz. ai du: nat piyk dat pi:pi 
are right in this. The English of to-day are not the 
a: rait in dis. di iyglif dv ta'dei a: nat da 
same as the English of some years ago, so there will 
seim az di iyglif dv saiu jiaz a'gou, sou dea wil 
also be new things for me to learn on another trip to 
a:lsou bi: nju: pirjz fa mi: ta la:n an a'nAda trip tu 
England. I must say that of all the foreign countries 
iy gland. ai mAst sei dat av a:l da farin kAtitriz 
I have seen, I have found England the most interesting.” 
ai hav si:n, ai hav faund iy gland da moust intf istiy.” 
few = not many 
one 
ones 
Do you like an old 
house better than 
a modern one? 
Do you like old 
ideas better than 
modern ones? 
6/3 
189 
Chapter Twenty-Two (22). 
He spends, 
he spent, 
he has spent 
[spends, spent,spent ]. 
like = the same as 
world 
the whole world 
= all the world 
Storm: “I have never been to a foreign country before; 
sta:m: “ai hdv nevd bi:n tu a for in kAntri bi'fo:; 
I have spent all my holidays in our own country. The 
ai hdv spent o:l mai holidiz in auar oun kAntri. da 
last five years I have spent my summer-holidays with 
la:st faiv jiaz ai hav spent mai sAmahalidiz void 
my parents in the country, where they have a small 
mai pearants in da kAntri, hwea dei hcev a sma:l 
house near a lake. But it would be a good thing to 
haus niar a leik. bAt it wud bi: a gud piy ta 
try something new this year. Of all foreign countries 
trai SAMpitj nju: dis jia. av a:l for in kAntriz 
I am most interested in England, just like you, Mr. 
ai am moust intristid in iy gland, d$ASt laik ju:, mist a 
Miller. If we make the trip, we must visit the British 
mil a. if wi: meik da trip, wi: mAst vizit da britif 
Museum one of the first days we are in London. It 
mju'ziam WAn av da fa:st deiz wi: a: in l And an. it 
is one of the greatest museums, not only in Europe, 
iz WAn av da greitist mju'ziamz, not ounli in juarap, 
but in the whole world. I have seen a picture of the 
bAt in da houl wa:ld. ai hav si:n a piktjar av da 
museum, and I know that inside it there are so many 
mju'ziam, and ai nou dat 'in'said it dear a: sou meni 
things which we must see. I should like to spend 
piyz hwitf wi: mAst si:. ai fud laik ta spend 
several hours there every day.” 
sevral auaz dea evri dei.” 
190 
The Twenty-Second (22nd) Chapter. 
Mr. Miller: “And you can. I know a hotel in the same 
mistd mile: “and ju: keen. ai nou a hou'tel in da seim 
part of the town as the British Museum. I have always 
pa:t av da taun az da britif mju'ziam. ai hav a:lwaz 
lived there when I have been in London. It is a good 
livd dea hwen ai hav bi:n in Ixndan. it iz a gud 
hotel, and cheap, too, so if we go, I think we will live 
hou'tel, and tfi:p, tu:, sou if wi: gou, ai pitjk wi: wil liv 
there as long as we are in London. Then you can 
dea az log az wi: a: in lAndan. den ju: kan 
visit the British Museum as often as you like, Storm. 
vizit da britif mju'ziam az o:fn az ju: laik, sto:m. 
It is only a few minutes’ walk from the hotel. The 
it iz ounli a fju: minits wo:k fram da hou'tel. da 
first seven or eight days we could spend in London 
fa:st sevn o:r eit deiz wi: kud spend in lAndan 
itself. There are many things to be seen in a big town 
it'self. dear a: meni pigz to bi: si:n in a big taun 
like London, so that a week would not be too much 
laik lAndan, sou dat a wi:k wud not bi: tu: mAtf 
for us to spend in London itself. Then we could visit 
far as ta spend in lAndan it'self. den wi: kud vizit 
some places just outside London, where the Thames 
SAm pleisiz d$Ast 'aut'said lAndan , hwea da temz 
is not the same dirty river as in the town itself. I 
iz not da seim da:ti riva az in da taun it'self. ai 
river 
often spent a whole day on the river Thames in summer 
o:fn spent a houl dei on da riva temz in SAma 
191 
Chapter Twenty-Two (22). 
steamer 
think 
am thinking 
thought 
was thinking 
have thought 
have been 
thinking 
I think of a trip 
to England now 
and then. 
I am thinking of a 
trip to England 
now. 
I thought of a trip 
to England 
yesterday. 
I was thinking of 
a trip to England 
when he came into 
the room. 
I have thought of 
a trip to England 
many times. 
I have just been 
thinking of a trip 
to England. 
that 
those 
I like that house. 
I like those houses. 
my grandparents 
= my parents* 
parents 
my grandmother 
= the mother of 
one of my parents 
my grandfather = 
the father of one 
of my parents 
when the weather was fine. There are small steamers 
hwen da we da waz fain. dear a: smo:l sti:maz 
to take you from place to place. It is not very far 
ta teik ju: fram pleis fa pleis. it iz not veri fa: 
from our hotel to the river, so that we could go down 
fram ana hou'tel ta da riva, sou dat wi: kud gou daun 
there one day and look at the steamers.” 
dea wan dei and luk at da sti:maz ." 
Mrs. Miller: “I think the idea you have been talking 
misiz mila: “ai piyk di ai'dia ju: hav bi:n to:kiy 
about just now is a very good one. I should like to 
a'baut d^Ast nau iz a veri gud wah. ai jud laik ta 
go with you on the trip to England, but I can’t. We 
gou wid ju: on da trip tu iygland, bAt ai ka:nt. zvi: 
can’t take the boy on a trip like that, he is too small; 
ka:nt teik da boi on a trip laik dcet, hi: iz tu: smo:l; 
just think of him on a steamer! He and I will spend 
d$Ast piyk av him on a sti:ma! hi: and ai wil spend 
those few weeks with my parents; they will be only 
douz fju: wi:ks wid mai pear ants; dei wil bi: ounli 
too glad to have us. You know what grandparents 
tu: glced ta hcev as. ju: nou hwot grcendp ear ants 
are like — they always think that their grandchildren 
a: laik — dei o:lwaz piyk dat dea grcendtfildran 
are the best in the whole world. The boy’s grand- 
a: da best in da houl wa:ld. da boiz grcend- 
mother lets him do everything he wants to, and his 
mAda lets him du: evripiy hi: wonts tu, and hiz 
192 
The Twenty-Second (22nd) Chapter. 
grandfather buys so many things for him to play with 
grcendfa.da baiz sou meni piyz fd him ta plei wid 
that I don't know what to do with them. It will be 
dat ai dount nou hwat ta du: wid dam . it wil bi: 
so good for the boy to be at a farm in the country; 
sou gud fa da boi ta bi: at a fa:m in da k\ntri; 
he can play outside in the sun all day, and we shall 
hi: kan plei 'aut'said in da s\n o:l dei, and wi: fal 
both have a good time.” 
boup hav a gud taim” 
Mr. Miller: “Well, if you feel like that, my dear, I shall 
mist a mil a: “wel, if ju: fi:l laik dcet, mai did, ai fal 
be glad to go. It would be good to see old England 
bi: glced ta gou. it wud bi: gud ta si: ould iy gland 
again with these young men.” Storm: “We are glad 
a'gein wid di:z ]ayj men” sto:m: “wi: a: glced 
to hear that. Well, boys, it's time to go home, I think. 
ta hia dcet. wel, baiz, its taim ta gou howm, ai piyk. 
Oh, it's cold outside, and look — there is snow falling! 
ou, its kould 1 aut'said, and luk — dear iz snou fa:liy! 
One doesn't think of that when it is so warm inside.” 
WAn dAznt piyk av dcet hwen it iz sou wa:m 'in'said” 
EXERCISE A. 
What did Brown — of when he was walking home from 
work? He was thinking that it would be a good — 
to try to find some English people to — to. Later 
WORDS: 
trip 
perhaps 
few 
193 
Chapter Twenty-Two (22). 
since 
change 
conservative 
modern 
foreign 
spend 
spent 
like 
visit 
British 
hotel 
place 
outside 
Thames 
river 
steamer 
world 
inside 
grandparents 
grandfather 
grandmother 
grandchild 
interesting 
walk 
whole 
museum 
just 
ones 
but 
work — 
working 
walk — 
walking 
fall — falling 
talk — talking 
sit — sitting 
have — having 
in the evening he — of the idea that they could all 
make a — to England. The others — that this was a 
very good idea. Mr. Miller has been to most — in 
England; there are — places that he has not seen. But 
it is several years — he was there, and many things 
have — since then. The English are not so — as many 
people think. Many people go to — countries in their 
holidays, but Storm has — all his holidays in his own 
country. 
The — at which Mr. Miller has lived, in London is near 
the British Museum, so that the young men can — it 
as often as they —. A week is not too much to spend 
in a big town — London. 
EXERCISE B. 
What was Brown doing when he thought of a trip to 
England? ... What did Mr. Miller think of the idea? 
... When was Mr. Miller in England last? ... Are the 
English very conservative? ... Which of the foreign 
countries he has visited has Mr. Miller found the most 
interesting? ... How many days will they spend in 
London itself? ... What will they visit after the first 
week? ... What is the name of the museum in London 
that is one of the biggest in the work!? ... Who lives 
at the farm that Mrs. Miller will go to when her husband 
goes to England? ... Are the boy’s grandparents kind 
to him? ... 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with <how’. 
How many children are there in the Smith family? 
194 
The Twenty-Second (22nd) Chapter. 
Answer ... New question ...? There are twenty-four 
hours in a day and a night. How old is Mr. Smith? 
Answer ... Question ...? Mrs. Smith was twenty-five 
years old when she got her watch. How far is it from 
the farm to the lake? Answer ... Question ...? It is 
two hours in a car from the farm to the city. How 
long does Mr. Smith work every day? Answer ... 
Question ...? Most English children go to school for 
ten years. How much did Mrs. Smith pay for her new 
frock? Answer ... Question ...? Mr. Smith gave his 
wife twelve pounds. How often does Mr. Smith visit 
his brother in the country? Answer ... Question ...? 
The children go to school five days a week. 
195 
Chapter Twenty-Three (23). 
The Twenty-Third (23rd) Chapter. 
MAKING PLANS 
start = begin 
The next time the young men were together to study 
da nekst taint da jAy men wa: ta'geda ta st\di 
English, they had much to talk about. All of them had 
itjglif, dei heed MAtf ta to:k a'baut. o:l av dam had 
been thinking about the trip and making plans. They 
bi:n piykiy a'baut da trip and meikiy plcenz. dei 
had talked to their families about it and asked people 
had ta:kt ta dea fcemiliz a'baut it and a:skt pi:pl 
who had visited England about the best time to go there. 
hu: had vizitid iygland a'baut da best taim ta gou dea. 
Their families were very much interested in the plans, 
dea fcemiliz wa: veri mAtf intristid in da plcenz, 
but thought that the young men would not be able to 
bAt po:t dat da jAy men wud not bi: eibl ta 
learn to speak English well enough before they were 
la:n ta spi:k iyglij wel i'nAf bi'fo: dei wa: 
to go. Storm told the others that his brother smiled 
ta gou. sta:m tould di Adaz dat hiz brAda smaild 
when he spoke about the trip, as if he thought that 
hwen hi: spouk a'baut da trip, az if hi: po:t dat 
they would not be able to make it. “‘Well, wait and 
dei wud not bi: eibl ta meik it. “‘zvel, w n M and 
see, 5 I tell him,” Storm said, smiling; “‘when we start 
si:, 9 ai tel him/ 3 sto:m sed, smailiy; cct hwen wi: sta:t 
196 
The Twenty-Third (23rd) Chapter. 
on our trip, and you must stay at home because you 
on aua trip, and ju: mAst stei dt houm bi'koz ju: 
don’t speak English, I shall be the one to smile.’ And 
dount spi:k iyglif, ai fdl bi: da WAn ta smail. y and 
I think that when he sees us start on our trip next 
ai piyk dat hwen hi: si:z as sta:t on aua trip nekst 
summer, you will have him as a pupil in the autumn, 
SAma, ju: wil hcev him az a pju:pl in di o:tam, 
Mr. Miller!” 
mista mild!” 
Mr. Miller was very glad to hear that his three pupils 
mista mila waz veri glad ta hia dat hiz pri: pju:plz 
felt that they would be able to learn enough. “I hope 
felt dat dci zvud bi: eibl ta la:n i'n\f. “ai houp 
you know that you must do much work before the 
jn: nou dat jn: niAst du: mAtf wa:k bi'fo: da 
summer-holidays. When we make our plans and talk 
SAinaholidiz . hwen wi: meik aua plcenz and to:k 
about all the things that we are going to do, you will 
a'baut o:l da piyz dat zvi: a: gouiy ta du:, ju: wil 
learn many words that you are going to use on the 
lain meni wa:dz dat ju: a: gouiy ta ju:z on da 
trip. So the more we talk about it, the better you 
trip, sou da mo: zvi: to:k a'baut it, da beta ju: 
will be able to make yourselves understood on the trip 
wil bi: eibl ta meik joi'sclvz And a'stud on da trip 
itself,” said Mr. Miller. “First we must decide when 
it'self/* sed mista mila. “fa:st wi: niAst di'said hwen 
I am the one to 
smile = I am he 
who can smile. 
I am going to do 
something = I 
shall do something. 
the ... the 
The more we do, 
the better it is. 
197 
Chapter Twenty-Three (23). 
upon = on 
manager 
we want to go, and you three will have to decide how 
wi: wont ta gou, and ju: pri: wil hcev ta di'said hau 
long we are going to stay in England. My holidays are 
lay wi: a: gouiy ta stei in iygland. mai holidiz a: 
two months, and I can stay there the whole summer, 
tu: mAnps, and ai kan stei dea da houl s\ma, 
if I want to, so you must decide that part of it your- 
if ai wont tu, sou ju: m\st di'said dcet pa:t av it jo:- 
selves.” 
1 selvz 
“That depends upon how long our holidays are,” said 
“dcet di'pendz a'pon hau by aua holidiz a:/ 3 scd 
Storm. “I have two weeks; how much have you?” he 
sto:m. “ai licev tu: wi:ks; hau niAtf hcev ju:? 33 hi: 
asked the others. Brown also had two weeks, but Wood 
a:skt di a daz. braun o:lsou heed tu: wi:ks, bAt wud 
said, “I don’t know whether I shall have two weeks or 
sed, “ai dount nou hweda ai jal hcev tu: wi:ks o: 
not, for I have not worked a whole year for my new 
not, far ai hav not wa:kt a houl jia fa mai nju: 
firm, you know. It all depends upon the manager of 
fa:m, ju: nou. it o:l di'pendz a'pon da mcenid^ar av 
the firm. I will ask him whether I can have two 
da fa:m. ai wil a:sk him hweda ai kan hcev tu: 
weeks, which I think he will give me when he hears 
wi:ks, hwitf ai piyk hi: wil giv mi: hwen hi: hiaz 
that we are planning to go to England. I will ask the 
dat wi: a: plceniy ta gou tu iygland. ai wil a:sk da 
198 
The Twenty-Third (23rd) Chapter. 
manager to-morrow whether I can have that or not.” 
manid^a ta'marou hwedd ai kan hav dat o: not. 33 
“Good,” said Mr. Miller; “we know that we shall have 
“gud ” sed mistd mile; “wi: non ddt wi: jal hav 
at least twelve days for the trip, and perhaps two weeks. 
at li:st twelv deiz fa da trip, and pa'keeps in: wi:ks. 
little 
less 
least 
Now we must decide on the time for the trip. As you 
nan wi: m\st di'said an da taim fa da trip. az ju: 
know, I have been to England at different times of the 
non, ai hav bi:n tu iygland at difrant taimz av da 
year, so it is not difficult for me to tell you which of the 
jia, sou it iz not difikalt fa mi: ta tel ju: hwitf av da 
different holiday months will be best. June is often 
difrant halidi mAnps wil bi: best. d^u:n iz a:fn 
a lovely month in England, a very beautiful month, 
a IavU mAnp in iygland, a veri bju:taful mAnp, 
lovely = beautiful 
but you can never be sure that the weather will be 
bAt ju: kan neva bi: fua dat da weda wil bi: 
good. July is often a very dry month; it is the month 
gud. d^u'lai iz a:fn a veri drai niAnp; it iz da mAnp 
that has the least rain. I was there for four weeks 
dat hcez da li:st rein. ai waz dea fa fa: wi:ks 
in July once and had only half an hour’s rain, but then 
in d^u'lai WAns and had ounli ha:f an auaz rein, bAt den 
rain 
that was less rain than they had had for years in that 
dat waz les rein dan dei had had fa jiaz in dat 
month. I am sure that July would be the best month. 
mAnp. ai am fua dat d^u'lai wud bi: da best mAnp. 
199 
Chapter Twenty-Three (23). 
He leaves, he left, 
he has left {li:vz, 
left, left]. 
some 
any? 
not any 
We shall see some 
football. 
Is there any foot¬ 
ball this week? 
We shall not see 
any football. 
In August it is too hot to be in London. The school 
in o:gast it iz tit: hot to hi: in lAndan. do sku:l 
holidays are in August, and every one who is able to 
holidiz a: in o:gast, and evri wah hu: iz eibl to 
leave London in August goes away. Many of my 
li:v lAndon in o:gast gouz d'wei. meni av mai 
friends that I should like to see again will have left 
frendz dot ai Jud laik to si: a'gein wil hav left 
London if we go there in that month.” 
Lvndan if wi: gou dea in dcet mAnp” 
Brown: “I should like to see some English football. Do 
braun: “ai fud laik ta si: sam iyglif futbo:l. du: 
you think there will be any football in July?” “No, 
ju: piyk dea wil bi: eni futbo:l in d^u'lai?” “non, 
you will not see any football if we go in July; the 
ju: wil not si: eni futbo:l if wi: gou in d^u'lai; da 
football season does not begin until September. Perhaps 
futbod si:zn dAZ not bigin An'til sap'temba . pa'hceps 
you think it would be better to go in September, then?” 
ju: piyk it wud bi: beta ta gou in sap'temba, den?” 
“What is the weather like in September?” “Oh, some- 
“hwot iz da weda laik in sap'temba?” “ou, SAm- 
times it is very good, but you can't be sure. There is 
taimz it iz veri gud, bAt ju: ka:nt bi: jua . dear iz 
often very much rain in September, and the evenings 
o:fn veri mAtf rein in sap'temba, and di i:vniyz 
are so short.” “Well, then I think that July will be 
a: sou fo:t” “wel, den ai pit/k dat d^u'lai wil bi: 
200 
The Twenty-Third (23rd) Chapter. 
the best month. I don’t want to go in September,” 
da best niAnb. ai dount want ta gou in sap'temba” 
Brown said with a smile, “just to see football. I can 
braun sed wid a smail, “d$Ast ta si: futba:l. ai kan 
see English football when the English football players 
si: itjglif futba:l hwen di iyglif futba:l pleiaz 
come to our country to play.” “Well, have we decided 
kAm tu aua kAntri ta plei” “wel, hav wi: di'saidid 
to go in July, then?” asked Mr. Miller. “Yes,” Wood 
ta gou in d^u'lai, den?” a:skt mist a mila. “jes” wud 
answered, “we can at least decide upon July as the 
a:nsad, “wi: kan at li:st di'said a'pan d^u'lai az da 
best month to go in; then it depends upon whether 
best mAnp ta gou in; den it di'pendz a'pan hweda 
we can all get our holidays in July. But let us leave 
wi: kan a:l get aua halidiz in d^u'lai. bAt let as li:v 
that question now. We can talk about that later; it 
dcet kwestjan nau. wi: kan ta:k a'baut dcet leita; it 
is difficult for our managers to decide now when we 
iz difikalt far aua mcenid^az ta di'said nau hwen wi: 
are to have our holidays this year.” 
a: ta hcev aua halidiz dis jia ” 
“Well, boys,” said Mr. Miller, “before we leave, you 
“wel, baiz,” sed mista mila, “bi'fa: wi: li:v, ju: 
have got at least six months in which to learn the 
hav gat at li:st siks mAnps in hwitj ta la:n da 
different words that you will need on the trip. To-night 
difrant wa:dz dat ju: wil ni:d an da trip. ta'nait 
are to have=shall 
have 
201 
Chapter Twenty-Three (23). 
Let me see gome 
books, please = 
be kind enough to 
let me see some 
books! 
order = ask for 
I will talk to you about what to say when you go 
ai mil to:k td ju: d'baut hwot td sei hwen ju: gou 
into a shop to buy something that you need. What 
intu d fop td bat s Amply ddt ju: ni:d. hwot 
do you say when you want to buy a book, Wood?” 
du: ju: sei hwen ju: wont td bai d buk, mud?” 
Wood: “I think I should say: I want to buy a book; let 
wud: “ai piyk ai fud sei: ai wont td bai d buk; let 
me look at some.” 
mi: luk dt s\m” 
Mr. Miller: “Yes, you could say that. But you could 
mistd mild: “jes, ju: kud sei dcet. bAt ju: kud 
have put in a word which the English use very much, 
hdv put in d wd:d hwitf di iyglif ju:z veri mAtf, 
that is ‘please". Very often, you need only give the 
dcet iz *pli:z 9 . veri o:fn, ju: ni:d ounli giv dd 
name of the thing you want and put the word ‘please" 
neim dv dd piy ju: wont dnd put dd wo:d c pli:z 9 
after it. That is enough. But don’t forget the word 
a:ftdr it. dcet iz i'nAf % bAt dount fd'get dd wd:d 
‘please" when you want to ask for something. Now 
€ pli:z 9 hwen ju: wont tu a:sk fo SAmpiy. nau 
let me hear you buy cinema tickets for us, Brown!” 
let mi: hid ju: bai sinimd tikits fdr as, braun!" 
Brown: “Four tickets for eight o’clock, please!” 
braun: “fo: tikits for eit d'klok, pli:z!” 
“Right! And will you call the waiter and order our 
“rait! dnd wil ju: ko:l dd weitd dnd o:dd aud 
202 
The Twenty-Third (23rd) Chapter. 
dinner, Storm?” Storm: “Waiter! Four vegetable soups, 
dina, sta:m?” sta:m: “weita! fa: vedytabl su:ps, 
please!” 
pli:z!” 
“Yes, that is right. I think you can do that now; it 
“jes, dat iz rait. ai pitjk ja: kan du: dat nau; it 
is not very difficult. We will also talk about how to 
iz not veri difikalt. wi: wil o:lsou to:k a'baut hau ta 
go to London. Part of the trip we shall go by water, 
gou ta l And an. pa:t av da trip wi: jal gou bai wo:ta, 
and part of the trip we shall go by land. When we 
and pa:t av da trip wi: jal gou bai land. hwen wi: 
travel by land, we shall go in a train, and on the part 
travl bai land, wi: jal gou in a trein, and on da pa:t 
of our trip when we travel by water, we shall go in 
av aua trip Jtwen wi: travl bai wa:ta, wi: jal gou in 
a steamer. Did any of you ever travel by train?” 
a sti:ma. did eni av ju: eva travl bai trein ? 33 
“Oh yes, we have all done that,” they answered. 
“ou jes, wi: hav a:l d\n dat / 3 dei a:nsad. 
“But I never travelled much by steamer,” one of them 
“b\t ai neva travld m\tj bai sti:ma , 33 w\n av dam 
said. “I have only made very short trips of about 
sed. “ai hav ounli meid veri fa:t trips av a'baut 
twenty minutes, so it will be the first time that I shall 
twenti minits, sou it wil bi: da fa:st taim dat ai jal 
ever try a long trip by water.” 
eva trai a htj trip bai wo:ta 33 
I travel, I tra¬ 
velled, I have tra¬ 
velled. 
203 
Chapter Twenty-Three (23). 
WORDS: 
EXERCISE A. 
study (verb) 
stay 
start 
pupil 
going to 
decide 
depend 
whether 
firm 
manager 
plan 
plan (verb) 
at least 
different 
lovely 
sure 
less 
least 
rain 
every one 
leave 
left 
Storm’s brother will have to — at home when they — 
on their trip, because he cannot — English; and then 
Storm will be the — to smile. The three young men 
must — how long they are — to stay in England, 
because their teacher can stay the — summer, if he — 
to. Which of the — holiday months is the best to — 
London? July is the best month; it has the — rain, 
and people have not — London yet. If they go in 
August, Mr. Miller cannot be — that he will find — 
of his friends in London. What is the shortest way 
to say that you want to — socks, for example? The 
shortest way is to say, “A pair of socks, —!” In what 
way were the teacher and his three pupils going to — 
to England? They were going to travel part of the 
trip by — and part by —. Had the young men — 
travelled by steamer before? Yes, but one of them 
had — been on a trip of more than twenty minutes. 
any 
player 
play 
difficult 
land 
travel 
train 
ever 
need 
upon 
the... the 
order 
about 
EXERCISE B. 
What does Storm’s brother do when Storm speaks about 
the trip? ... Why do the young men’s families think that 
they will not be able to learn enough English before 
they start on the trip? ... Which will be the one to 
smile when they start on their trip, Storm or his 
brother? ... In which month did they decide to make 
the trip? ... Did Wood know whether he would get two 
weeks’ holidays? ... Has Wood worked for the manager 
of his firm for a whole year yet? ... Can they be sure 
204 
The Twenty-Third (23rd) Chapter. 
that the weather will be good in July? ... In which 
month do most people leave London for their holidays? 
... Is there any football in England in July? ... Could 
the young men’s managers decide at once when they 
could have their holidays? ... 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with <how’. 
How do we go in and out of houses? Answer ... 
Question ...? John sometimes goes through the window. 
How do we get from the ground floor to the second 
floor? Answer ... Question ...? The children walk 
to school. How did Mrs. Smith get her friend Daisy’s 
letter? Answer ... Question ...? The children bought 
the chocolate at the chocolate-shop. How are the three 
young men and their teacher going to get to England? 
Answer ... Question...? By land they are going to 
travel in a train. How did Storm know that Mr. Miller’s 
son was awake? Answer... Question...? He knew 
that the best time to go was July, because he had 
visited England at different times of the year. How did 
Mr. Smith take the baby to the lake? Answer . . . 
Question . . .? Mr. Smith took the children to the 
restaurant in a taxi. 
205 
Chapter Twenty-Four (24). 
The Twenty-Fourth (24th) Chapter. 
GETTING MONEY FOR THE TRIP 
“Well, have you made any plans for our trip?” Mr. 
“wel, hav ju: meid eni plcenz far aua trip?” mistd 
Miller asked the boys on their next English evening. 
mild a:skt da baiz on dea nekst iyglif i:vhiy. 
“Oh yes, we have made many, and we have something 
“ou jes, wi: hav meid meni, and wi: hcev sAmply 
good to tell you; Wood’s manager will let him have 
gud ta tel ju:; wudz mcenid^a wil let him hcev 
two weeks’ holidays this summer. We have been 
.tu: wi:ks halidiz dis SAina. wi: hav bi:n 
thinking of how much the trip will cost, and we have 
piykiy av hau mAtf da trip wil kast, and wi: hav 
also asked about the tickets. We know how much it 
a:lsou a:skt a'baut da tikits. wi: nou hau mAtf it 
will cost us to go to England and back, but we do not 
wil kast as ta gou tu iygland and bcek, bAt wi: du: nat 
know how much it will cost to stay for two weeks in 
nou hau mAtf it wil kast ta stei fa tu: wi:ks in 
England. Could you tell us about that, Mr. Miller?” 
iy gland. kud ju: tel as a'baut dcet, mista mila?” 
“Yes, two weeks in London at a hotel that is both good 
“jes, tu: wi:ks in lAndan at a hou'tel dat iz boup gud 
and cheap will cost about fifteen pounds for each. Have 
and tfi:p wil kast a'baut fifti:n paundz far i:tf. hav 
206 
The Twenty-Fourth (24th) Chapter. 
you got so much money?” 
ju: got sou MAtf mAni?” 
Wood: “Fifteen pounds! That is much. I haven’t got 
wud: “fifti:n pounds! dcet is MAtf. ai hcevnt got 
so much money.” Brown: “I think we shall all have 
sou MAtf MAni .” braun: “ai piyk wi: fdl o:l hcev 
to try to earn some extra money, for we have very 
to trai tu din sam ekstra MAni, fd wi: hcev veri 
little, I am afraid.” 
litl, ai dm a'freid” 
Storm: “When I spoke to the manager at the office 
stoim: “hwen ai spouk ta da mcenid^a at di of is 
about our trip to London, he was very interested. He 
a'baut aua trip ta lAndan, hi: was veri intristid. hi: 
said that the firm would be glad to have a young man 
sed dat da fa:m wud bi: glced ta hcev a jAy mcen 
in the office who knew something about the English 
in di of is hu: nju: SAinpiy a'baut di itjglif 
and England. He said that such a man would always 
and iygland. hi: sed dat SAtf a mcen wud o:lwas 
be of great use to a big firm, and he gave me to under- 
bi: av greit ju:s tu a big fa:m, and hi: geiv mi: tu Anda- 
stand that the firm would give me some of the money 
'stcend dat da fa:m wud giv mi: sam av da mAni 
for the trip. So I do not think that I shall need to 
fa da trip. sou ai du: not pitjk dat ai fal ni:d tu 
earn extra money for the trip.” 
o:n ekstra mAni fa da trip.” 
haven’t = have 
not 
office 
207 
Chapter Twenty-Four (24). 
The idea is used 
by the manager = 
the manager uses 
the idea. 
!MI 
library 
next to nothing = 
almost nothing 
Brown: “It must be a fine thing to work for a firm like 
braun: “it mAst bi: a fain piy td Wd:k far a fa:m laik 
that. But I will tell you something about the book-shop 
dcet. bAt ax wil tel ju: s Am piy a'baut da bukjap 
where I work. If one of us gets a good idea for the 
hwear ai wa:k. if wah av as gets a gud ai'dia fa da 
shop, and it is used by the manager, we are paid well 
fap, and it iz ju:zd bai da mcenid^a, wi: a: peid wel 
for it. And I have an idea! It is just the right time 
far it. and ai hcev an ai'dia! it iz d^Ast da rait taim 
now to speak to him about it. I will tell you all about 
nau ta spi:k ta him a'baut it. ai wil tel ju: o:l a'baut 
it; then you can tell me what you think of it. Perhaps 
it; den ju: kan tel mi: hwat ju: piyk av it. pa'hceps 
you know that some book-shops have a library. There 
ju: nou dat SAm bukjaps hcev a laibrari. dear 
are many people who would like to read, but they 
a: meni pi:pl hu: wud laik ta ri:d, bAt dei 
cannot afford to buy many books, because the prices 
kcenat a'fa:d ta bai meni buks, bi'kaz da praisiz 
are so high. But at a library, they can borrow books 
a: sou hai. bAt at a laibrari, dei kan barou buks 
for next to nothing, and after they have read the books, 
fa nekst ta nApiy, and a:fta dei hav red da buks, 
they bring them back again. At the back of the shop 
dei briy dam bcek a'gein. at da bcek av da fap 
we have a small extra room, which could be made into 
wi: hcev a sma:l ekstra ru:m, hwitf kud bi: meid intu 
208 
The Twenty-Fourth (24th) Chapter. 
a library where people could read for a short time to 
a laibrari hwea pi:pi kud ri:d far a fo:t taim ta 
see what books they want to borrow. In this way, 
si: hwot buks dei want ta boron. in dis wei, 
many people who cannot afford to buy the books they 
meni pi:pl hu: kcenot a'fo:d ta bai da buks dei 
would like to read, can get all the books they want 
wud laik ta ri:d, kan get o:l da buks dei wont 
without paying very much, but we should get some 
wid'aut peiig veri mAtj, b\t wi: jud get saw, 
money out of it. Besides, when people come in to 
. niAni aut av it. bi'saidz, hwen pi:pl hm in ta 
borrow books, they would also see all the other things 
borou buks, dei wud o:lsou si: o:l di Ada pig2 
we have in the shop, so that perhaps we could sell 
wi: hrev in da fop, sou dat pa'hceps wi: kud sel 
them some of these things, too. There are four other 
dam *SAin av di:z pigz, tu:. dear a: fo:r Ada 
book-shops in our street; but this idea has not been 
bukfops in aua stri'.t; bAt dts N ai'dia haz not bi:n 
tried by any of them. And it would be a good thing 
traid bai eni ov dam. and it wud bi: a gud pig 
for us to be the first shop to take it up.” 
far as ta bi: da fa:st fop ta teik it Ap.” 
Mr. Miller: “That is a very good idea! I am sure that 
mist a mila: “dcet iz a veri gud ai'dia! ai am fua dat 
it will be a good thing for your shop. And you would 
it wil bi: a gud pig fa jo: fop. and ju: wud 
street 
The idea has not 
been tried by 
them = they have 
not tried the idea. 
209 
Chapter Twenty-Four (24). 
He sells, he sold, sell more books, too, because people would learn to 
^ouM^souWL se l mo: buks, tu:, bi'kaz pi:pl wud la:n ta 
read good books, and that would bring more people to 
ri:d gud buks, and dcet wud briy ma: pi: pi ta 
the shop to buy them.” 
da Jap ta bai dam ” 
Brown: “Yes, and I would write letters to the people 
braun: “jes, f and ai wud rait let as ta da pi: pi 
who live in our part of the town to tell them about 
hu: liv in aua pa:t av da taun ta tel dam a'baut 
new books and to invite them to read books in this 
nju: buks and tu in'vait dam ta ri:d buks in dis 
cheap way. I will take this idea to the manager 
tfi:p wei. ai wil teik dis ai'dia ta da mcenid^a 
to-morrow. I am sure he will use the idea, and then 
ta'marou. ai am fua hi: wil ju:z di ai'dia, and den 
I shall be able to afford the trip, because he always 
ai fal bi: eibl tu a'fa:d da trip, bi'kaz hi: 5:lwaz 
pays well. My manager is a man of modern ideas; 
peiz wel. mai mcenid^ar iz a mcen av mad an ai'diaz; 
he is always looking for something hew, and he is not 
hi: iz a:lwaz lukiy fa SAmpiy nju:, and hi: iz nat 
afraid to try something very modern if he thinks it 
a'freid ta trai SAmpiy veri madan if hi: piyks it 
will bring more business to the shop. I think that he 
wil briy ma: biznis ta da fap . ai piyk dat hi: 
is a very clever business man, the cleverest I know. 
iz a veri kleva biznis mcen, da klevarist ai nou. 
210 
The Twenty-Fourth (24th) Chapter. 
He always knows the right thing to do to sell more. 
hi: o:lwaz nous da rait piy ta du: ta sel mo:. 
The managers of the other shops in our street are not 
da mcenid^az av di Ada fops in aua stri.t a: not 
half so clever as he is, and when their shops are almost 
ha:f sou kleva az hi: iz, and hwen dea fops a: o:lmoust 
empty, our shop is almost full of customers, and we are 
emti, aua fop iz o:lmoust ful av k\stamaz, and wi: a: 
always busy all day. Sometimes we are so busy that 
o:lwaz bizi o:l dei. SAmtaimz wi: a: sou bizi dat 
we cannot find time to have our lunch, because there 
wi: kcenot faind taim ta hcev aua lAnf, bi'koz dear 
are customers coming in all the time so that our shop 
a: kAstarnaz kAiniy in o:l da taim sou dat aua fop 
is never empty. I hope I shall be just as clever a 
iz nevar emti. ai houp ai fal bi: d^Ast az klevar a 
business man when I get older, but I am afraid there 
biznis mcen hwen ai get oulda, bAt ai am a'freid dear 
are many things for me to learn first.” 
a: meni piyz fa mi: ta la:n fa:st” 
Mr. Miller: “It is a good thing to work for such $ clever 
mist a mil a: “it iz a gud piy ta wa:k fa SAtf a kleva 
business man, for you can learn much from him and 
biznis mcen, fa ju: kan la:n niAtf fram him and 
get cleverer yourself. Well, how about you, Wood? 
get klevar a jo: x self. wel, hau a'baut ju:, wud? 
You have been so quiet all the evening. What is 
ju: hav bi:n sou kwaiat o:l di i:vniy. hwot iz 
customers = 
people who want 
to buy something 
in a shop 
211 
Chapter Twenty-Four (24). 
wrong?” Wood: “I have been thinking that perhaps 
ray?” wud: “ai hav bi:n pirjkiy ddt pa'keeps 
I shall have to stay at home. There is no way for me 
ai fdl hcev ta stei at houm. dear is nou wei fa mi: 
to earn extra money at our office, and, besides, there 
tu a:n ekstra mxni at auar of is, and, bi'saidz, dear 
is so much work to do there, that it would be diffi- 
iz sou MAtf wa:k ta du: dea, dat it wud bi: difi- 
cult for me to take any other work in the evenings. 
kalt fa mi: ta teik eni Ada wa:k in di i.vniyz. 
I don’t know how to get the money. I don’t like to 
ai dount nou hau ta get da mAni. ai dount laik ta 
borrow it, because my salary is not very high, and it 
borou it, bi'kaz mai scelari iz not veri hai, and it 
would be difficult for me when the money had to be 
wud bi: difikalt fa mi: hwen da mAni herd ta bi: 
paid back. I think my salary is too low for all the 
peid bcek. ai piyk mai scelari iz tu: lou far o:l da 
work I do.” 
wa:k ai du :/ 3 
Brown: “Why don’t you ask your manager for a rise 
braun: “hwai dount ju: a:sk jo: mcenid^a far a raiz 
of salary, then?” “Oh, I couldn’t do that. I haven’t 
av scelari, denf 33 “ou, ai kudnt du: deet. ai licevnt 
been there for a year yet, and, besides, I have just 
bi:n dea far a jia jet, and, bi'saidz, ai hav d$Ast 
asked him for longer holidays.” Brown: “You can at 
a:skt him fa loyga holidiz . 33 braun: “ju: keen at 
212 
The Twenty-Fourth (24th) Chapter. 
least try. If you cannot earn the money you need in 
li:st trai. if ju: kcenot a:n da mAni ju: ni:d in 
some other way, you must try. Go to him to-morrow 
sAm a da zvei, ju: mAst trai. gou ta him ta'morou 
and ask for a rise; tell him how much work you do, and 
and a:sk far a raiz; tel him hau niAtf wa:k ju: du:, and 
what you are going to spend the money on.” Wood: 
hwot ju: a: gouiy ta spend da mAni on” wud: 
“Well, I don’t like to ask for a rise, but I will try. If 
“wel, ai dount laik tu a:sk far a raiz, bAt ai wil trai. if 
I can’t earn a higher salary, I don’t see where I shall 
ai ka:nt a:n a haia scelari, ai dount si: hwear ai fal 
get the money from. I am not full of ideas like Brown; 
get da mAni from, ai am not ful av ai'diaz laik braun; 
my head is empty.” 
mai hed iz emti.” 
Mr. Miller: “Don’t let us talk any more of it to-night. 
mist a mila: “dount let as to:k eni mo:r av it ta'nait. 
It is getting late now, I am afraid, and, besides, my wife 
it iz getiy leit nau, ai am a'freid, and, bi'saidz, mai waif 
is already waiting with the coffee. Next time we shall 
iz o:Vredi weitiy zmd da kofi. nekst taim zvi: fal 
know whether you will be able to afford to go or not, 
nou hweda ju: wil bi: eibl tu a'fo:d ta gou o: not, 
and then we will speak more about our plans.” 
and den wi: wil spi:k mo:r a l baut aua plcenz.” 
Mrs. Miller: “Please come and have coffee. A cup of 
misiz mila: “pli:z kAm and hcev kofi. a kAp av 
to spend money = 
to pay out money 
213 
Chapter Twenty-Four (24). 
hot coffee will do you good, now that you have to go 
hot kofi wil du: ju: gud, nau Set ju: hcev td gou 
out into the cold night.” “Yes, thank you very much,” 
aut intd da kould nait” “jes, pcetjk ju: veri mAtj,” 
the young men answered. 
da j\fj men a:nsad. 
Brown: “Hot coffee is a very good thing on a cold 
braun: “hot kofi iz a veri gud piy on a kould 
night, and we should all like very much to speak English 
nait, and mi: Jud o:l laik veri m\tj ta spi:k iyglif 
with you for a few minutes, Mrs. Miller. We know from 
mid ju: far a fju: minits, misiz mil a. wi: non fram 
your husband that you speak English well, and that 
jo: hAzband dat ju: spi:k iyglif wel, and dat 
you like that language as much as we do.” Mrs. Miller: 
ju: laik dcet Iceygwid 3 az mAtj az wi: du:” misiz mila: 
“Yes, my husband and I like English so well that we 
“jes, mai hAzband and ai laik iyglif sou wel dat wi: 
often use it when we are alone together.” 
o:fn ju:z it hwen wi: a: a'loun ta x geda” 
WORDS: 
earn 
extra 
office 
use 
library 
EXERCISE A. 
The three friends would try to — some extra money. 
Many people like to read, but they cannot — to buy 
all the books which they want to —. So they borrow 
the books in a —, where they can get them for- 
nothing. There were five book-shops in the — where 
214 
The Twenty-Fourth (24th) Chapter. 
Brown’s — had his shop, and Brown thought that he 
was the — business man he knew. Mr. Miller thought 
that Brown’s new idea would bring more — to the 
shop. Did they have many — in the shop? Yes, 
sometimes the shop was so — of customers that they 
had no time to have their —. Did Wood have a high 
—? No, but he would try to ask for a — of salary 
the next day. Why was he not glad to ask for a —? 
Because he had just asked the manager for longer —. 
EXERCISE B. 
What did Mr. Miller ask the young men on the next 
English evening? ... How much would it cost for each 
to stay two weeks in London? ... How would they get 
the money? ... Was Storm’s manager interested in his 
trip to England? ... Why would Storm not need to earn 
extra money for the trip? ... What would Brown do 
to earn some extra money? ... Where could Brown’s 
manager have his library? ... What would Brown do 
to let people know about the library? ... Why would 
it be difficult for Wood to take any other work in the 
evenings? ... Did he think that his salary was high 
enough? ... What did Brown tell him to do to get more 
money? ... 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with ‘when’. 
When is summer? Answer ... Question ...? Winter 
afford 
borrow 
sell 
sold 
street 
afraid 
business 
clever 
business man 
empty 
full 
customer 
busy 
get 
salary 
besides 
rise 
by 
215 
Chapter Twenty-Four (24). 
is in the months of December, January, and February. 
When are John and Helen at school? Answer ... 
Question ...? Mr. Smith is at his office from nine till 
five. When will John be fourteen years old? Answer 
... Question ...? Helen will be thirteen years old in 
three years. When do the Smith family have their 
summer-holidays? Answer ... Question ...? In Lon¬ 
don the school holidays are in August. When did the 
three young men begin their study of English? Answer 
... Question ...? John began to go to school seven 
years ago. When did Mr. Smith take his children to 
the cinema? Answer ... Question ...? Mr. Smith took 
his children out for a walk to the lake when the weather 
was fine. When are you going to England? Answer ... 
Question ...? I am going to town to-morrow. When 
did Mrs. Smith come home from the birthday party? 
Answer ... Question ...? George came home very late 
from the lake. 
216 
Chapter Twenty-Five (25). 
The Twenty-Fifth (25th) Chapter. 
GOOD NEWS 
“You look very happy to-night, boys,” said Mr. Miller 
“ju: luk veri hcepi ta'nait, boiz” sed mista mild 
a few evenings later when they were together again; 
d fju: i:vnifjz leitd hwen dei wa: ta'gedar a'gein; 
“you must have something good to tell me.” “Yes, 
“ju: mAst hcev sAmply gud to tel mi:” “jes, 
I, at least, have good news,” Storm answered; “my 
ai, at li:st, hcev gud nju:z” sta:m a:nsdd; “mai 
manager said yesterday that he would pay the whole 
mcemd^a sed jestadi dat hi: wud pei da houl 
trip for me. Isn’t that good news? I had hoped that he 
trip fa: mi:, iznt dcet gud nju.zf ai had houpt dat hi: 
would pay part of it; but it is very kind of him to 
wud pei pa:t av it; bAt it iz veri kaind ev him ta 
pay all of it, I think.” 
pei o:l av it, ai piyk.” 
“And I have good news, too,” said Brown. “My manager 
“and ai hcev gud nju:z, tu:” sed braun. “mai nuenid^a 
thought that my idea about the library was very good. 
pa:t dat mai ai'dia a'baut da laibrari waz veri gud. 
I am going to begin to work at it at once. I am going 
ai am gouiy ta bi'gin ta wa:k cet it at WAtis. ai am gouiy 
to write all the letters myself and make all the plans, 
ta rait a:l da letaz mai 1 self and meik a:l da plcenz. 
7/1 
217 
Chapter Twenty-Five (25). 
He shows, he 
showed, he has 
shown [jou2, 
jotul, foun]. 
I think of going 
= I think to go 
too, so it is a good chance for me to show what I can do. 
tu:, sou it is a gud tfa:ns f 9 mi: td fou hwot ai kan du:. 
It is the first time I have had such a chance, and it is 
it is da fa:st taim ai hav heed SAtj a tfa:ns, and it is 
a very good chance for a young man like myself; so 
a veri gud tfa:ns far a f\rj mcen Iciik mat self; sou 
you will understand that I am happy. I showed him 
ju: wil Anda'steend dat ai am heepi. ai foud him 
some of the letters I had written, and he said they 
SAin av da letas ai had ritn, and hi: sed dei 
were very good. And now I come to the best part of 
wa: veri gud. and nau ai kAm ta da best pa:t av 
my news. The manager is so sure that the idea is good 
mai nju:s. da meenid^ar is sou fua dat di atdia is gud 
that he is going to give me a month’s extra pay. Is that 
dat hi: is gouiy ta giv mi: a mAnps ekstra pei. is deet 
good news or not, I ask you? 55 
gud nju:s o: not, ai a:sk ju:?” 
Mr. Miller: “Yes, that is very good news. And even 
mist a mile: “jes, deet is veri gud nju:s. and i:van 
Wood looks happy to-night.” 
wud luks heepi ta'nait” 
Wood: “Yes, I have some good news, too. You know 
wud: “jes, ai heev saw gud nju:s, tu:. ju: nou 
I didn’t like to ask for a rise, and yesterday I was 
ai didnt laik tu a:sk far a rais, and jestadi ai was 
thinking all day of going to my manager, but I hadn’t 
pigkig o:I dei av gouir/ ta mai meenid^a, bAt ai heednt 
218 
The Twenty-Fifth (25th) Chapter. 
the courage; I was afraid of asking him. Once I tried 
da k at id 3; ai waz a'freid av a:skiy him. wahs ai traid 
to take courage and had even got as far as the door, 
ta teik kArid$ and had i:van gat az fa:r az da do:, 
when the manager called one of the young ladies into 
hwen da mcenid^a ko:ld wah av da jAy leidiz inta 
his office, and I had to wait again. But later in the 
hiz of is, and ai heed ta weit a'gein. bAt leitar in da 
day he called me in, as there was something he wanted 
dei hi: ko:ld mi: in, az dea waz SAmpirj hi: wontid 
to speak to me about. He had been watching my work 
ta spi:k ta mi: a'baut. hi: had bi:n wotfiy mai wa:k 
for some time, he said, to see how I did it. He had 
fa SAm taim, hi: sed, ta si: hau ai did it. hi: had 
been watching that of some of the others, too, and 
bi:n wotfiy deet av SAm av di Adaz, tu:, and 
although I was a new man there, he thought that I 
0: I'd on ai waz a nju: mcen dea, hi: po:t dat ai 
did my work best. I am going to work for him as his 
did mai wa:k best. ai am gouiy ta wa:k fa him az hiz 
secretary, because, he said, he was getting older now, 
sekratri, bi'koz, hi: sed, hi: waz getiy oulda nau, 
and he needed a young man to remember all the things 
and hi: ni:did a jAy mcen ta rtmemba o:l da piyz 
that he forgot himself. ‘I need a man,* he said, ‘with 
dat hi: fa'got him'self. *ai ni:d a mcen, 9 hi: sed, ( wid 
a good head, who can look after all the small things in 
a gud hed, hu: kan Ink a:ftar o:l da smo:l piyz in 
afraid of asking = 
afraid to ask 
to watch = to 
look at 
that of some of 
the others = the 
work of some of 
the others 
219 
Chapter Twenty-Five (25). 
He becomes, he 
became, he has 
become [b?k\ms, 
bi'heim, bi'ksm]. 
a rich man = a 
man with much 
money 
the office, so that there will be no need for me to 
di of is, sou ddt dee wil hi: non ni:d fa mi: ta 
think of them, a man who can write my letters, and 
piyk av dam, a mcen Jin: ken rait mai letez, and 
who is not afraid of a little extra work now and then. 
hu: iz not a'freid av a litl ckstra wa:k nau and den. 
And you are not afraid of that, I know. How would 
and ju: a: not a'freid av dat, ai non. hau zvud 
you like to become my secretary V ‘I should like 
ju: laik ta bi'kAin mai sekratri? 9 ‘ai fud laik 
nothing better, 5 I answered. ‘Well, I shall be glad to 
nxpiy beta/ ai a:nsad. ‘wel, ai fal hi: glced ta 
have you do this work — oh, and I almost forgot to 
hcev ju: du: dis wa:k — on, and ai e:lrnoust fa'gat ta 
tell you, that now you have become my secretary you 
tel ju:, dat nan ju: Jiav bi'kAin mai sekratri ju: 
will become a rich man, too, 5 he said, smiling. ‘From 
wil bi'kxm a ritf man, tn:, 9 hi: sed, smailiy. ‘from 
the first of next month you will get a rise. You will 
da fa:st av nekst mxnp ju: wil get a raiz. ju: zoil 
need the money for your trip, I think. 5 I thanked him, 
ni:d da mAni fa ja: trip, ai piyk. 9 ai pceykt him, 
but I did not tell him that I had been trying all the 
bAt ai did net tel him dat ai had bi:n traiiy a:l da 
morning to work up courage enough to ask for a 
ma.niy ta wa:k Ap kxrid 3 i'nxf tu a:sk far a 
rise.” 
raiz/' 
220 
The Twenty-Fifth (25th) Chapter. 
Mr. Miller: “I could see that you all had good news, 
mista mil a: “ai kud si: dat ju: o:l heed gud nju:z, 
although I didn’t think it would be as good as this. 
o:Vdou ai didnt piyk it wud hi: dz gud dz dis. 
Now, when can you have your holidays?” 
nan, Jnven kan ju: hcev jo: holidiz?” 
Storm: “I can have mine when I want them. Shall 
sto:m: “ai kan hcev main hwen ai wont dam . fal 
we try to make the trip during the first fortnight of 
wn: trai ta meik da trip djuariy da fa:st fo:tnait ev 
July? How does that time suit you?” 
dyi'lait hau d\z deet taim sju:t ju:?” 
Mr. Miller: “It suits me well enough, but the question 
mist a mil a: “it sju:ts mi: wcl i'nAf, b\t da kwestfan 
is not so much how it suits me, as how it suits Brown 
iz not sou m\tj hau it sju:ts mi:, az hau it sjicts bra it n 
and Wood, because my holidays are longer than theirs. 
and wud, bi y koz mai holidiz a: loyga dan deaz. 
When do you think you can have yours, Wood?” “That 
hwen du: ju: piyk ju: kan hcev jo:z, wud?” “dcct 
time suits me very well. July is a quiet month at 
taim sju:ts mi: veri wcl. d^u'lai iz a kzvaiat m.\np at 
our office. Most of the people with whom we do 
auar of is. moust av da pi: pi wid 1iu:m wi: du: 
business are away on their holidays, so we also have 
biznis a:r a'wei on dea holidiz, sou wi: o:lsou hcev 
ours in July. How about yours, Brown?” “I am 
auaz in d^u'lai. hau a'baut jo:z, braun?” “ai am 
7 2 
a fortnight = two 
weeks 
mine 
yours 
his 
hers 
ours 
yours 
theirs 
It is my book = 
the book is mine. 
It is your book = 
the book is yours. 
It is his book = 
the book is his. 
It is her book = 
the book is hers. 
It is our book = 
the book is ours. 
It is your book = 
the book is yours. 
It is their book = 
the book is theirs. 
221 
Chapter Twenty-Five (25). 
easy = not diffi¬ 
cult 
who 
whom 
whose 
The men who do 
business are busi¬ 
ness men. 
The man whom 
you saw at my 
office is a busi¬ 
ness man. 
The men with 
whom we do busi¬ 
ness are also busi¬ 
ness men. 
The business man 
whose shop I work 
in is very clever. 
won’t = will not 
afraid it is not going to be easy for me to have mine 
a'freid it iz nat gouitj td In: i:zi fa mi: ta hcev main 
in July, because I had half of July last year. But I 
in dyi'lai, bi'kaz ai heed ha:f av d^u'lai la:st jia. b\t ai 
will try to speak to some of the others at the shop 
u’il trai ta spi:k ta s\m av di \daz at da fap 
to-morrow. There are two whom I will ask to exchange 
ta'marou. dear a: tn: hu:m ai wil a:sk tu iks'tfeind 3 
holidays with me. There is a young man whose 
holidiz wid mi:. dear iz a j\y mcen hu:z 
holidays are in July this year. I will ask him to 
halidiz a:r in dgu'lai dis jia. ai wil a:sk him tu 
exchange holidays with me, so that he can have mine, 
iks'tfeind 3 halidiz zvid mi:, sou dat hi: kan hcev main, 
and I can have his. If his holidays are during the last 
and ai kan hcev hiz. if hiz halidiz a: djuariy da la:st 
fortnight of July, I can ask one of the young ladies, 
fa:tnait av d^u'lai, ai kan a:sk w\n av da j\y leidiz, 
whose holidays are during the first part of the month, 
hu:z halidiz a: djuariy da fa:st pa:t av da m\np, 
to exchange hers for mine. We often exchange our 
tu iks'tfeind 3 ha:z fa main. wi: a:fn iks'tfeind 3 aua 
holidays at the shop, when it suits us better that way, 
halidiz at da fap, hwen it sju:ts as beta deed wei, 
so I hope it won't be too difficult.” Mr. Miller: “Well, 
sou ai houp it wount bi: tu: difikelt” mista mile: “wel, 
that is decided, then.” 
deet iz di'soidid, den ” 
222 
The Twenty-Fifth (25th) Chapter. 
Some days later, B^own was able to bring the good 
saiii deiz leitd, braun Wdz eibl td briy dd gitd 
news that the young lady whose holidays were during 
nju:z ddt dd j'ajj leidi hu:z holidis zvd: djudriy 
the first fortnight of July, was willing to exchange 
dd fd:st fd.tnait dv d^u'lai, wdz wiliy tu iks'tjeind 3 
holidays with him, although his were a whole month 
hdlidiz wid him, o:Vdou hiz wd:r d houl niAnp 
later. It had even been very easy to get her to do so, 
leitd. it hdd i:vdti bi:n veri i:zi td get hd: td du: sou, 
because the time suited her plans much better. 
bi'koz dd taini sju:tid hd: plccnz niAtf betd. 
Now that they knew they would have enough money, 
nan ddt dei nju: dei wud heev i'nAf niAni, 
and that they would be able to take their holidays at 
dud ddt dei wud bi: eibl td teik dtd lulidiz dt 
one and the same time, the young men became still 
iv ah dnd dd seiin taint, dd jAy men bi'keim stil 
more interested in their studies. Every time they had 
nu: r intristid in ded stAdiz. evri taini dei herd 
a chance of being together during the next month, they 
d tfa:ns dv bi:iy td'gedd djudriy dd nekst niAnp, dei 
talked about their coming trip. Mr. Miller told them 
tj:kt d'baut dsd kAiniy trip. mistd mild tould ddm 
about the things he had seen in England, and they 
d'baut dd piyz hi: hdd si:n in iyghnd, dnd dei 
read about England in books and newspapers. Some- 
red d'baut iyghnd in buks dnd njic.speipdz. sAm¬ 
is willing to = is 
glad to 
a chance of being 
together = 
a chance to be to¬ 
gether 
newspaper 
223 
Chapter Twenty-Five (25). 
times they even bought the English newspaper ‘The 
taims dei i:van ba:t di iyglif nju:speipa € da 
Times’ and tried to read it; but that was not easy for 
taims ’ and traid ta ri:d it; b\t dat was not i:zi fa: 
them; although they could understand something, most 
dam; a:l'dou dei kud And a'stand SAmpiy, moust 
of it was too difficult, and Mr. Miller often had to 
dv it was tu: difikdlt, and mists mild a:fn had tu 
explain it to them in words that they knew. 
iks'plein it td dam in wa:ds dat dei nju:. 
paper = news¬ 
paper 
Brown often bought the extra paper about books and 
braun o:fn bo:t di ckstra pcipar a'baut buks and 
the men who write them, which ‘The Times’ brings 
da men hu: rciit dam, hwitf ‘da taims 9 britjz 
out every week. He could understand enough of the 
aut evri wi:k. hi: kud Anda'stand i'nAf av da 
language to be able to get many ideas for his library, 
laygwid 3 ta bi: eibl ta get meni atdiaz fa his laibrari , 
so that his manager began to think that he must be 
sou dat hiz rnanid^a bi'gan ta pitjk dat hi: niASt bi: 
a very clever man who had studied much about modern 
a veri klcva man hu: had stAdid m\tf a'baut madan 
books. 
buks. 
Brown also tried to get Storm and Wood interested in 
braun j.lsou traid ta get sto:in and zvud intristid in 
this extra paper, but Wood was too busy with his new 
dis ckstra peipa, bAt wud zvaz tu: bizi zvid hiz nju: 
224 
The Twenty-Fifth (25th) Chapter. 
work, and Storm was too much of a business man to be 
wa:k, dnd sta:m waz tu: mAtf dv 3 biznis man td bi: 
interested in “all these dry old books”, as he called 
intristid in “o:l di:z drai ould buks”, dz hi: ko:ld 
them. They never used a word of any language but 
dam. dei ncvd jn:zd 3 wa:d 3v cm laggwid 3 bAt 
English when they were together. This was a very 
iyglif hwen dei W3: ta'geda. dis ivaz 3 vcri 
good thing, and when the month of July came at 
gud pig, 3nd hwen da mAttp 3v dyi'lai keim 3t 
last, the young men had become very good at English 
la:st, d3 jAtj men Ji3d bi y k\m veri gud at iyglij 
and were able to say almost everything. 
and wa:r eibl ta sei o.lmoust evripiy. 
EXERCISE A. 
The good — that Storm brought was that his manager 
was — to pay the whole trip for him. Brown had never 
before had a — to work at any idea of his own in the 
shop. When he had — his manager the letters which 
he had —, the manager said that they were — good. 
Wood was going to work for his — as his —, because 
the manager — a young man to — after things for him. 
The people with — Wood’s office does — are away in 
July. Was it — for Brown to have his holidays in July? 
No, it was very — for him to have his — in July. Were 
there any persons at the shop — holidays were — the 
first fortnight of July? Yes, there was a young lady, 
and she was — to exchange holidays with Brown. 
WORDS: 
news 
chance 
show 
showed 
shown 
even 
courage 
watch (verb) 
although 
secretary 
become 
became 
fortnight 
suit (verb) 
whom 
225 
Chapter Twenty-Five (25). 
whose 
during 
so 
newspaper 
mine 
yours 
hers 
ours 
theirs 
need 
easy 
willing 
a few 
rich 
exchange 
EXERCISE B. 
Why did all the boys look happy? ... Had Wood taken 
courage to ask for a rise? ... Why was Brown’s manager 
going to give him a month’s extra pay?... How did 
Wood’s manager know that Wood was the best man 
to have as his secretary? ... When was Storm going 
to have his holidays, and when was Brown going to 
have his? ... Whose holidays were during the first 
fortnight of July, the young man’s or the young lady’s? 
... With whom did Brown exchange holidays?... During 
which month is it best to go to England? ... Where did 
the three young men read about England? ... 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with ‘why’. 
Why is it best to go to England in July? Answer ... 
Question ...? Because you cannot be sure that the 
weather will be good in June. Why are the young 
men going to England? Answer ... Question ...? Mrs. 
Miller and the child are going to a farm in the country, 
because the child is too young to go for a trip to Eng¬ 
land. Why was Wood happy? Answer ... Question ...? 
John’s mother was afraid to let him go out on the ice, 
because it was too thin. Why did Daisy have a party? 
Answer ... Question ...? Mr. Smith and the children 
had dinner in town, because they had not been invited 
to the party. Why had the young men begun to study 
English? Answer ... Question ...? Wood’s manager had 
watched his work to see how he did it. Why will 
226 
The Twenty-Fifth (25th) Chapter. 
Mr. Miller get a new pupil next winter? Answer ... 
Question ... ? They will have to do much work so 
that they can speak English well enough when they 
go to England. Why would they like to visit the Bri¬ 
tish Museum when they get to England? Answer ... 
Question ...? Mr. Miller would like to go to England 
in July, because if he goes in August, most of his friends 
will have left London. Why would Mr. Smith’s brother 
not go with Mr. Smith and the children to the lake? 
Answer ... Question ...? Mr. Smith will not give John 
a watch yet, because he is too young. 
227 
Chapter Twenty-Six (26). 
The Twenty-Sixth (26th) Chapter. 
THE TRIP BEGINS 
at length = at last | At length the day has come when the teacher and his 
at leyp da dei haz k\m hwen da ti:tfar and hiz 
three pupils start on their trip to England. The time 
pri: pju:plz sta:t an dea trip tu iygland. da taint 
has gone too slowly for them, but at length the day 
haz gan tu: slouli fa: dam, b\t at leyp da dei 
has come. Brown has been packing his luggage all 
haz k\m. braun haz bi:n pcekiy hiz h\gid^ a:l 
finish = come to 
the end of 
station 
along with = 
together with 
the morning, but now his mother comes into his room, 
da ma:niy, bAt nau hiz m\da k\mz inta hiz ru:m, 
saying, “You must finish packing your luggage at once. 
seiiy, “ju: mxst finif pcekiy ja: lAgid$ at w\ns. 
You will have to be at the railway station in half an 
ju: wil hcev ta bi: at da reilzvei steifan in ha:f an 
hour.” 
aua” 
Brown: “I am ready to go, but I think I shall have to 
braun: “ai am redi ta gou, b\t ai piyk ai jal hcev ta 
take a taxi to the station, or I shall be late for my train.” 
*eik a iceksi ta da steifan, a:r ai jal bi: leit fa mai trein. 3y 
“Shall I come along with you to the station, or would 
(< fal ai k\m a'lay wid ju: ta da steifan, a: wud 
you rather go alone?” Brown: “I would rather have 
ju: ra:da gou a'loun?” braun: “ai wud ra:da hcev 
228 
The Twenty-Sixth (26th) Chapter. 
you along with me. But we must ask the driver to 
ju: a'lay wid mi:. b\t wi: m\st a:sk da draiva ta 
go fast. We have only twenty-five minutes now, and 
gou fa:st. mi: hcev ounli twenti'faiv minits nau, and 
if he drives too slowly, I shall be late for my train.” 
if hi: draivz tu: slouli, ai fal hi: leit fa mm t rein . 33 
Five minutes later they were on their way to the 
foiv minits leita dei wa:r an dea wei ta da 
railway station in a taxi. Brown was nervous. “It is 
reihvei steifan in a tceksi. braun waz na:vas. “it iz 
too slow, driver, can’t you drive a little faster?” he said 
tu: si on , draiva, ka:nt ju: draw a litl fa:staf }> hi: sed 
nervously. “All right, I will try,” the driver answered. 
na.vasli. “a:I rait, ai wil trai,” da draivar a:nsad. 
When they arrived at the station, the three others were 
hwen dei a'raivd at da steifan, da pri: xdaz wa:r 
already there, waiting. “Oh, there you are, Brown, 
a:Predi dea, zveitiy. “on, dea ju: a:, braun, 
we were a little nervous; we were afraid that you would 
wi: zva:r a litl na:vas: wi: wa:r a'freid dat ju: wud 
be late. We arrived here ten minutes ago. Now let us 
bi: leit. wi: a'raivd hia ten minits a'gou. nan let as 
go to the train.” 
gou ta da trein. 3> 
They were the last people to enter the train. “Good-bye, 
dei wa: da la:st pi:pl tu enta da trein. “'gud'bai, 
mother,” said Brown, kissing his mother on the mouth; 
m\da, 3> sed braun, Icisiy hiz nwdar an da mauf : 
He drives, he 
drove, he has dri¬ 
ven | draivz. drouv, 
driv)\ 1. 
slow 
slowly 
A slow driver. 
The driver is slow. 
The driver drives 
slowly. 
nervous 
nervously 
The nervous boy 
dropped his book 
on the floor. 
The boy is ner¬ 
vous. 
“I cannot do it,” 
said the boy ner¬ 
vously. 
enter = go into 
kissing his mother 
= and kissed his 
mother 
229 
Chapter Twenty-Six (26). 
smiling 
smilingly 
We saw the men’s 
smiling faces. 
The men were 
smiling. 
The men said good¬ 
bye smilingly. 
He sings, he sang, 
he has sung 
[siris, seen, JAfi]. 
“now I am leaving you and our good old country for 
“nan ai am li:viy jit: dnd aito gud onld kwntri fa 
two weeks.” “Good-bye, my boy, I hope you will have 
tu: wi:ks” “'gud'bai, uiai bai, ai hoitp jit: zeil hcrv 
a good time in England.” 
d gud taim in iy gland” 
Wood’s sister had also come along with her brother to 
zvudz sistd had a.lsou kAin a'lay zvid ha: biwda ta 
the station, and when she kissed him good-bye, she 
da steifan, and hzven fi: hist him gud'bai, fi: 
asked him to buy something for her in England. When 
a:skt him ta bai SAmpitj fa: ha: in iy gland. hwen 
the train was leaving the station, the three young men 
da trein waz li.viy da steifan, da pri: jAy men 
shouted a hurrah as loud as they could. “I never knew 
fautid a hu'ra: az laud az dei kud. “ai nova nju: 
you could shout as loud as that,” Mr. Miller said 
j it: kud faut az laud az deet” mist a mila sed 
smilingly. 
smailiyli. 
Brown: “Well, I never knew, myself. But now that 
braun: “zvel, ai neva nju:, mat self. bAt nau dat 
we have started on our trip, let us sing a song. Wood 
wi: hav sta:tid an aua trip, let as sly a say. zvud 
has a very good voice for singing, and he knows so 
hcez a veri gud vais fa siyiy, and hi: nouz sou 
many songs.” Wood: “Do you know the song of 
meni sayz” zvud: “du: ju: nou da say av 
230 
The Twenty-Sixth (26th) Chapter. 
‘The Emperor Napoleon and his ten thousand men’? 
c di empara na'pouljan and hie ten pauzand men 9 ? 
Let us try that. 55 
let as trai dcct. ” 
For the next ten minutes they were singing English 
fa da nekst ten niinits dci zva: siyiy iygiif 
songs at the top of their voices, so loud that almost 
sayz at da tap av dea vaisiz, sou land dat a:lmoust 
everybody in the carriage could hear them. Then, 
ezribadi in da ka>rid$ hud hi a dam. den, 
after some time, they began talking together. The 
ccfta sun taim, dei bi'gcun ta:kiy ta'geda. da 
train in which they were travelling was a very fast 
trein in hwitf dei wa: treeving zvaz a veri fo:st 
one with modern carriages. 
zvah zvid madan kerridyz. 
Mr. Miller: “We are going at a very high speed now, 
mist a miia: “zvi: a: gouiy at a veri hai spi:d mu, 
I should think seventy miles (a hundred and ten 
ai fud piyk sevnti mailz (a IiAndrad and ten 
kilometres) an hour. At this speed we shall soon be 
kitami:taz) an aua. at dis spi:d zvi: fal su:n hi: 
very far from home. 55 Brown: “Have you got a ciga- 
veri fa: fram houm” braun: {< hav ju: gat a siga- 
rette, Storm? I should like to smoke one now. 55 Storm: 
'ret, sta:mf ai fud laik ta smouk zvah nau” sta:m: 
“Yes, here are some cigarettes, but I have no matches. 
“jes, hiar a: saiu siga'rets, bAt ai hcev nou mcetfiz. 
emperor 
at the top of their 
voices = in as loud 
voices as they 
could 
everybody — 
every one 
began talking = 
began to talk 
carriage 
1 mile = 1.61 
kilometres 
soon = in a very 
short time 
match 
231 
Chapter Twenty-Six (26). 
e/ - 
Have you got a match, Mr. Miller?” Mr. Miller: “Yes, 
hav ju: got a mcetj, mist a mild ? 93 mists mils: “jes, 
I have got matches, and I have also.got tobacco, if you 
ai hav got mcetjiz, and ai hdv o:lsou got ta'bcekou, if ju: 
would rather smoke a pipe than cigarettes. I think a 
wud ra:da smouk $ paip don siga'rets. ai pif/k a 
pipe of good tobacco is better than cigarettes or cigars. 
paip dv gud ta'bcekou iz bets dan siga'rets o: si'ga:z. 
And here are to-day’s newspapers if you have not read 
and hiar a: ta'deiz nju:speipaz if ju: hav not red 
them yet. I think they will be the last newspapers we 
dam jet. ai pitjk dei wil bi: da la:st nju:speipaz wi: 
shall read in our own language for the next fortnight. 
fal ri:d in auar oun Icerjgwid 3 fa da nekst fo:tnait. 
To-morrow you must try to read a little in the English 
ta'morou ju: niASt trai to ri:d a litl in di it/glif 
newspapers. I don’t think you will be able to under- 
nju:speipaz. ai dount piyk ju: wil bi: eibl tu And a- 
stand much of them to begin with, but it will be good 
'stand mAtf av dam ta bi'gin wid, bAt it wil bi: gud 
for you to read them together every day, and I will 
fo: ju: ta ri:d dam ta'geda evri dei, and ai wil 
explain the many new and difficult words to you.” 
iks'plein da meni nju: and difikalt wa:dz ta ju :. 33 
Storm (looking out of the window): “How fine the 
sto:m (lukifj aut av da windou): “hau fain da 
232 
weather is now! When I got up this morning, there 
wedar iz nau! hwen ai got Ap dis mo:nit/, dea 
The Twenty-Sixth (26th) Chapter. 
were many clouds in the sky, and I thought we were 
wa: meni klaudz in da skai, and ai pa:t wi: wa: 
going to have rain, but now the sun is shining, and the 
gouiy ta hcev rein, b\t nau da s\n iz jainirj, and da 
sky is blue again, without any clouds.” 
skai iz blu. a'gein, wid'aut eni klaudz .” 
Mr. Miller: “I hope we shall have dry weather as long 
mist d mild: “ai houp wi: fdl hcev drai wed dr dz lorj 
It shines, it shone, 
it has shone [{aim, 
fon, fin]. 
as we are in England. But we cannot be sure. It very 
dz wi: a:r in iyglond. bAt wi: kcenot bi: jud. it veri 
often rains over there, and in winter they sometimes 
o:fn reinz ouvd dee, dnd in wintd dei sxmtaimz 
have fogs. Sometimes when you walk in the streets 
hcev fogz. SAintaimz hwen ju: wo:k in dd stri:ts 
of London, there is such a fog that you cannot see your 
dv Unden, dedr iz SAtf d fog ddt ju: kcenot si: jo: 
hand before you. And a London fog is not white or 
hand bi'fo: ju:. dnd d Unddn fog iz not hwait o: 
grey like the fogs in our own country, but dirty yellow.” 
grei laik dd fogz in audr oun kAntri, bAt de:ti jelou.” 
Storm: “What does yellow mean?” Mr. Miller: “Yellow 
sto:m: “hwot dAZ jelou mi:n?” mistd mild: “jelou 
is the colour of butter, for example.” 
iz dd kAldr dv bAtd, fdr ig'za.mpl.” 
Storm: “Hurrah, in ten minutes we shall be on board 
sto:m: “hu'ra:, in ten minits wi: fdl bi: on bo:d 
the steamer for England. I can see the water now.” 
dd sti:md fdr irjgldnd. ai kdn si: dd wo:to nau.” 
233 
Chapter Twenty-Six (26). 
Brown: “Well, that is good. I hope we can get a good 
braun: “wel, dcet iz gud. ai houp wi: kan get d gud 
lunch on board the steamer, for I am very hungry.” 
/am/ on bo:d da sti:ma, far ai am veri hAygri” 
All the others: “And so am I!” Mr. Miller: “Then let 
o:l di Adaz: {C and sou am ai!” mist a mila: (C den let 
us have our lunch as soon as we get on board.” 
as hcev aua IahJ az su:n az wi: get on bo:d” 
WORDS: 
at length 
pack 
finish 
luggage 
railway 
station 
rather 
driver 
drive 
drove 
driven 
fast 
slow 
nervous 
arrive 
EXERCISE A. 
When Brown had — his luggage, his mother asked him 
whether he wanted her to come — with him, or whether 
he would — go alone. Brown asked the — to drive —, 
because he would be late for his train if the driver — 
too —. Before Brown — the train, he said good-bye 
to his mother and — her on the mouth. In the train 
they — a hurrah and sang so — that almost every¬ 
body in the carriage could — them. The train went 
at a high —, 70 — an hour. When the sun is —, the 
— is blue, but when it is raining, the sky is full of —. 
The train in which they were travelling was a very — 
one with modern —. Mr. Miller would — smoke a — 
than —. Brown wanted to —, but he had no —. Mr. 
Miller explained to them that the fog in London is not 
white or grey, but dirty —. They decided to have 
lunch as — as they got on board the steamer. 
EXERCISE B. 
What was Brown doing just before he started on the 
trip? ... How did Brown and his mother get to the rail- 
234 
The Twenty-Sixth (26th) Chapter. 
way station? ... Did the driver drive fast enough? ... 
Why was Brown nervous? ... Did Brown arrive in 
time? ... What did Wood’s sister say when she kissed 
him good-bye? ... How loud did they sing in the train? 
... What song did they sing? ... What did Mr. Miller 
smoke? ... What was the weather like when Storm got 
up that morning? ... Where does the rain come from? 
... What is the colour of the London fog? ... 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with ‘who’, ‘whom’, 
or ‘whose’. 
Who is John? Answer ... Question ...? The farmer is 
Mr. Smith’s brother. Who took the children to the 
cinema? Answer ... Question ...? Mrs. Smith’s friend 
Daisy gave the birthday party. Whom did Mr. Smith 
give a watch? Answer ... Question ...? Aunt Jane 
gave John and Helen the shilling. Whom did Mr. Smith 
ask to go with him to the lake? Answer ... Question ...? 
In the picture ‘Wee Willie Wmkie’ they saw Shirley 
Temple. From whom did Mrs. Smith get a letter? 
Answer ... Question ...? Mrs. Smith got the twelve 
pounds from her husband. With whom are the young 
men going to England? Answer ... Question ...? Brown 
had exchanged holidays with one of the young ladies 
at the shop. Whose sister had come along to the 
station? Answer ... Question ...? Brown’s manager 
paid him a month’s extra salary. Whose were the ciga¬ 
rettes that Brown smoked? Answer ... Question ...? 
It was in Mr. Miller’s house that they came together 
to study English. 
be late 
enter 
shout 
hurrah 
loud 
sing 
sang 
sung 
song 
voice 
emperor 
kilometre 
speed 
soon 
cigarette 
smoke 
match 
tobacco 
pipe 
cigar 
cloud 
sky 
shine 
shone 
rain (verb) 
fog 
yellow 
on board 
kiss 
everybody 
along 
carriage 
get up 
so 
mile 
235 
Chapter Twenty-Seven (27). 
The Twenty-Seventh (27th) Chapter. 
waving their 
handkerchiefs = 
who were 
waving their 
handkerchiefs 
It blows, it blew, 
it has blown 
[blou2, blu:, biotin]. 
ON BOARD THE STEAMER 
As soon as our three young friends and their teacher 
az su:n az aua pri: j\y frendz and. dea ti:tfa 
had got on board the steamer which was to take them 
had gat an ba:d da sti.ma hwitf waz ta teik dam 
to England, they went down to their cabin with their 
tu iygland, dei went daun ta dea koebin wid dea 
luggage. They had got a cabin for four in the third 
lAgid$. dei had gat a kcebin fa fa: in da pa:d 
class, so that they were going to have it all to them- 
kla:s, sou dat dei wa: gouiy ta hcev it a:l ta dam- 
selves. When they came up on Heck again, they went to 
'selvz. hwen dei keim a p an dek a'gein, dei went ta 
look at people waving their handkerchiefs and shouting 
Ink at pi:pi weiviy dea hceykatfifs and fautiy 
good-bye to their friends. Storm: “Now the steamer 
gud'bai ta dea frendz, sta:m: “nau da sti.ma 
has begun to sail.” 
haz bi l gAn ta sell ” 
Mr. Miller: “The weather is not so fine; there is a strong 
mist a mila: “da wedar iz nat sou fain; dear iz a stray 
wind blowing now. It is strong enough to blow our 
wind blouiy nau. it iz stray i'nAf ta blou aua 
hats into the water, so I think we should go down before 
hcets inta da wa:ta, sou ai piyk wi: fud gou daun bi'fa. r 
236 
The Twenty-Seventh (27th) Chapter. 
it is too late, and have our lunch with a cup of strong 
// iz tu: leit, and hcev aua l\nf zvid a k\p av stray 
tea. With such a strong wind blowing, it is very possible 
ti:. zvid s\tf a stray zvind bloniy, it iz veri pasabl 
that we shall be seasick before we get to England. And 
dat zvi: fal hi: si:sik bi'fa: zvi: get tit iygland. and 
from other trips I have made by steamer, I know that 
frain \da trips ai hav mcid bai st'r.ma, ai non dat 
it is better to have eaten something and had something 
it iz beta ta haz* i:tn SAinpiy and heed SAinpiy 
to drink before the seasickness begins.” 
ta driyk bi'fa: da si:siknis bi'ginz” 
Storm: “I do not think it is possible for me to get 
sta:m: “ai du: nat piyk it iz pasabl fa mi: ta get 
seasick. I have been on the sea many times, and I never 
si.sik. ai haz r bi:n an da si: meni taimz, and ai neva 
was seasick, so I do not think I shall get seasick this 
zvaz si.sik, sou aid it: nat piyk ai fal get si:sik dis 
time. But I must say that the wind is very strong, 
taint. b.\t ai niAst sei dat da zvind iz veri stray, 
and the waves of the sea are very big.” 
ami da zveivz av da si: a: veri big” 
Wood: “Oh, that is nothing to speak of. Wait until 
zeud: % ‘ou t dcct iz n\piy ta spi:k av. zveit ah' til \ 
we get farther out to sea, then you are going to see farther 
Zi'i: get fa:dar ant ta si:, den jit: a: goitiy ta si: farthest 
waves.” 
zeeivz” 
with such a strong 
wind blowing = 
when such a strong 
wind is blowing 
It is possible = 
it can be done. 
237 
Chapter Twenty-Seven (27). 
When they came dawn, they sat down at a table and 
hwen dei keirn daun, dci sat daiin dt a tcibl and 
began to eat. Brown: “Which is the most important 
bi'gan tu i:t. braun: “hwitf is dd moust im l pa:tant 
route for Europeans to England, Mr. Miller?” Mr. 
ru:t fa juara'pi:ans tu iyghnd, mistd mih?” mist a 
Miller: “It is difficult to say which is the most important. 
mih: “it is difikdlt td sci hwitf is da moust ini 1 pa:taut. 
There are many different routes, and I have tried 
dear a: meni difrant ru:ts, and ai hav traid 
several of them. I think the three most important are: 
sevral av dam. ai piyk da pri: moust in? pa :t ant a: : 
Esbjerg-Harwich, The Hook of Holland-Harwich, and 
esbja.g-harid 3, da huh av haland-harid 3, and 
Calais-Dover. The Esbjerg-Harwich route is used 
kcelei-douva. di ezbja:g-harid 3 ru:t is ju:sd 
especially by travellers coming from the north of 
is'pefali bai treevhs k\mirj fram da na:p av 
via = by the 
route of 
Europe. It is a very long route. Travellers coming 
juarap. it iz a veri lay ru:t. trccvlas kwmiy 
from Central Europe, from Germany, for example, go 
fram sentral juarap, fram d^a.mani, far ig'sarmpl, gou 
via The Hook of Holland-Harwich. The shortest one 
vaia da huk av haland-harid 3. da fa.tist wah 
is the Calais-Dover route. It does not take more than 
is da kcelei-douva ru:t. it d\s nat teik ma: dan 
an hour and a quarter to get to England by that route. 
an auar and a kwa:ta ta get tu iygland bai dat ru:t. 
238 
The Twenty-Seventh (27th) Chapter. 
Perhaps you think that there is no time to get seasick 
pa'haps ju: pirjk bat bear iz nou taim ta get si.sik 
on that route, but the trip is sometimes an hour and 
an beet ru:t, b\t ba trip iz SAmtaimz an auar and 
a quarter too long when the wind is blowing hard. 
a kwa:ta tu: lay hwen ba wind iz blouitj ha:d. 
Especially travellers from the south of Europe go 
is'pefali trcevlaz fram ba saup av juarap gou 
via Calais-Dover. Then there are several other routes, 
vaia kalei-douve. ben bear a: sevral \ba ru:ts, 
but they are not so much used as these three.” 
b\t bei a: nat sou mAtf ju:zd az bi:z pri:” 
While they were eating and talking, the steamer got 
hwail bei wa:r i:tiy and ta:kiy, ba sti:ma gat 
far out from land, and here the wind was blowing 
fa:r aut fram land, and hia ba wind waz blouitj 
harder than before they began to sail. People began 
ha:da ban bi'fa: bei bi'gan ta seil. pi:pi bi'gan 
to leave their tables to go to their cabins. Their faces 
ta li:v bea teiblz ta gou ta bea kabinz. bea feisiz 
were very pale. Storm’s and Wood’s faces looked 
wa: veri peil. sta:mz and wudz feisiz lukt 
especially pale; they were almost white. “You look 
is'pefali peil; bei wa:r a.lmoust hwait. “ju: luk 
a little pale,” said Mr. Miller; “wouldn’t it be better 
a litl peilsed mist a mile; “wudnt it bi: beta 
for you to go up on deck to get some fresh air?” 
fa: ju: ta gou Ap an dek ta get sAm fref ee?” 
while they were 
eating = during 
the time they 
were eating 
239 
Chapter Twenty-Seven (27). 
quickly = fast 
It is impossible = 
it cannot be done. 
impossible = not 
possible 
Stprm: “Yes, I think some fresh air would do me good. 
sta:m: “jes, ai piyk saw fref to wud du: mi: gud. 
The air is very hot down here, isn’t it?” Wood: “I think 
di ear iz veri Jiat daun hid, iznt it?” wud: “ai piyk 
I will go out into the air with you. I like fresh air 
ai wil gou out intd di ea wid ju:. ai laik fref ea 
when I have been in a hot room for some time.” They 
hwen ai hdv bi:n in a Jut ru:in fa saw taim ” dei 
went up on deck very quickly. 
went Ap an dek veri kwikli. 
It is twenty minutes before the steamer gets to England. 
it iz twenti minits bi'fa: da stiima gets tu iy gland. 
The teacher and his three pupils are now all on 
da ti:tfar and hiz pri: pju:plz a: nau a :l an 
the deck of the steamer, looking at the land which 
da dek av da sti:ma, lukiy at da land hwitf 
they can see. 
dei kan si:. 
Storm: “I thought it impossible for me to get seasick. 
sta:m: “ai pa:t it im'pasabl fa mi: ta get si:sik. 
I was not very well when the wind was blowing its 
ai waz tut veri wet hwen da wind waz hlouiy its 
hardest and the waves were so big, but now I am all 
ha:dist and da weivz wa: son big, bAt nau ai am a:l 
right again.” Brown, smiling: “Nothing is impossible 
rait a'gcin” braun, smailhj: “n\piy iz im'pasabl 
in this world.” 
in dis wa:ld ” 
240 
The Twenty-Seventh (27th) Chapter. 
Mr. Miller: “Now we shall be in England in a short 
mist a mil a: iC nau zvi: jal bi: in itjgland in a fa:t 
time. Before we arrive I want to talk to you about 
taim. bi'fj: wi: a'raiv ai zvant ta ta:k ta ju: a'baut 
something important. I have a good friend in London. 
sxmpiy im'pa.tant. ai Jurv a gud frend in Ixndan. 
When I go to England, I always bring a box of fifty (50) 
hzvcn ai gou tu iy gland, ai a.lzvaz briy a baks av fifti 
cigars along for him.” Wood: “Why don’t you buy 
si'ga:z a'lay fa: him” zvud: “hzvai dount ju: bai 
the box of cigars in London?” Mr. Miller: “Because 
da baks av si'ga:z in Ixndan?” mist a mil a: “bi'kaz 
cigars are very expensive in England. You can get 
si'ga:z a: veri iks'pensiv in iy gland. ju: kan get 
a cigar for a shilling, but then it is not very good; 
a si'ga: far a filiy, bxt den it iz nat veri gud; 
if you want a good cigar you have to pay two shillings. 
if ju: zvant a gud si'ga: ju: hcev ta pei tu: filiyz. 
Now, a person must not take more than twenty-five (25) 
nau, a pa:sn mxst nat teik ma: dan tzventi'faiv 
cigars with him through the Customs into England. 
si'ga: z zvid him pru: da kxstamz intu iy gland. 
If you want to take more with you, you must pay duty 
if ju: zvant ta teik ma: zvid ju:, ju: mxst pei dju.ti 
on them. There is a high duty on tobacco in England, 
an dam. dear iz a hai dju:ti an ta'bcekou in iygland, 
so even cigars from our country would be too expensive 
sou i:van si'ga:z fram aua kxntri zvud bi: tu: iks'pensiv 
box 
expensive = dear 
one [zvah] 
two [tu: ] 
three [pri: | 
four [fa:] 
five [fair] 
six [siks] 
seven [scvn\ 
eight [eit] 
nine [twin] 
ten [ten] 
eleven [ Vlcvn ] 
twelve [tzvclz 1 ] 
thirteen ['/>j 1 
fourteen ['fa: l ti:n\ 
fifteen ['fifti :n} 
sixteen ['siks'ti:n\ 
seventeen 
[ l sevn'ti:n J 
241 
Chapter Twenty-Seven (27). 
eighteen ['ei'ti:n] 
nineteen [ l nain'ti:n] 
twenty [twenti] 
thirty [pa:ti\ 
forty \h:ti] 
fifty [fifti] 
sixty [siksti] 
seventy [sevnti] 
eighty [eiti] 
ninety [nainti] 
a hundred 
[a h\ndrad] 
a thousand 
[a pauzand] 
a million [a miljan] 
i| I had to pay duty on them in England. This time 
if ai heed td pei djir.ti jn ddm in iijghnd. dis tciim 
I have brought seventy-five (75) cigars along; fifty of 
ai hdv brj.t sevnti'faiv si'ga:a d'hij; fifti ov 
them are for my friend, and twenty-five are for myself, 
ddm a: fd mat frond, and twenti'faiv a: fd mai'sclf, 
for the two weeks we are going to stay in England. 
fd dd tu: zvi:ks wi: a: gouiy td stci in ifjghnd. 
Now I will give each of you twenty cigars to take 
nan ai wil giv i:tf dv ju: twenti si'ga:a td teik 
through the Customs. I know you have brought no 
pm: dd kAStdma. ai nou ju: hdv brj:t nou 
cigars yourselves, as you only smoke cigarettes.” 
si'ga:a jj:'selva, da ju: ounli smouk sigd'rets” 
Wood: “I am not sure what is meant by the words duty 
zvud: “ai din njt ftid hwot ia inent bai dd wd'.da dju:ti 
and Customs.” Mr. Miller: “When you want to take 
dnd k\stdma” mistd mild: “hwen ju: wont td teik 
things like cigars or silk stockings into a foreign 
piya laik si'ga.a o: silk stdkiya intu d fjrin 
country, you have to pay some money before they will 
JcAntri, ju: hcev td pei saui niAtii bi'fj: dei wil 
let you take them' with you. That is called to pay duty. 
let ju: teik ddm wid ju:. deet ia kj:ld td pei dju:ti. 
The place or the office where the duty is paid by the 
dd pleis d: di of is hwed dd dju.ti ia peid bai dd 
travellers is called the custom-house. You will under- 
trcevldz ia ko:ld dd kAStdmhaus. ju: wil Andd- 
242 
The Twenty-Seventh (27th) Chapter. 
stand that you cannot get into a foreign country without 
'st<cnd dot ju: kccnot get intu o forin kAntri wid'aut 
going through a custom-house or ‘going through the 
gouiij pm: o kAstomhaus o: ‘gouirj pru: do 
Customs’ as it is called. That is easy to understand, 
kAstomz ’ oz it iz ko:ld. dcct iz i:zi tu Ando'stand, 
isn’t it?” Wood: “Oh yes, now I see what the words 
iznt it?” K'nd: “on jes, nan ai si: hwot do wo:dz 
mean.” 
mi :n” 
EXERCISE A. 
When people get on board a steamer, they first go 
down to their — with their —. Then they go up on — 
again to — good-bye with their handkerchiefs to their 
friends. At sea there is often a strong — blowing. 
When the wind is blowing —, many people get —. 
It is best to have eaten something before the — begins. 
There are three — routes to England. — from the — 
of Europe especially go via Esbjerg-Harwich. Most 
— from the — of Europe go by the Calais-Dover —. 
When Storm got seasick, his face — very —. He said 
that he needed some-. When travellers arrive in 
England, they have to go through the —. They must 
pay — on cigars if they have more than twenty-five 
each. Why did Mr. Miller want to take a — of cigars 
WORDS: 
cabin 
deck 
wave (verb) 
sail 
wind 
blow 
blew 
blown 
strong 
hard 
possible 
impossible 
seasick 
seasickness 
sea 
243 
Chapter Twenty-Seven (27). 
wave 
farther 
farthest 
route 
important 
especially 
traveller 
central 
via 
south 
pale 
fresh 
air 
quickly 
box 
Customs 
custom-house 
duty 
expensive 
seventy-five 
class 
while 
Holland 
% with him into England? Because cigars are very — 
in England. When do people get —? When the wind 
is — hard. Was it — for Storm to — seasick? Yes, 
it was, although he had thought it was —. Which is 
the shortest — to England? The route — Calais-Dover 
is the shortest. 
EXERCISE B. 
Was the weather fine when our four travellers started 
to sail for England? ... Why did they want to have 
their lunch at once? ... Why did Storm think that it 
was impossible for him to get seasick? ... How long 
does it take to go to England via the Calais-Dover 
route? ... Was the wind blowing harder on land than 
farther out at sea? ... How was it possible to tell that 
the wind was blowing harder farther out at sea? ... By 
what travellers is the Esbjerg-Harwich route especially 
used? ... Did Mr. Miller know all the different routes 
to England? ... What is understood by paying duty? ... 
Did Mr. Miller have to pay duty on the cigars he had 
brought along with him to England? ... 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with <what’. 
What is white? Answer ... Question ...? The colour 
of a leaf is green. What is the name of the Smith 
boy? Answer ... Question ...? Mr. Smith’s brother is 
a farmer. What day is Friday? Answer ... Question 
...? Sunday is a holiday. What time is it now? 
244 
The Twenty-Seventh (27th) Chapter. 
Answer ... Question ...? It was ten minutes past 
three when I came. What did George’s parents buy 
for him? Answer ... Question ...? They gave him 
a pair of skates for Christmas. What stockings did 
Mrs. Smith give Daisy on her birthday? Answer ... 
Question ...? We have pears, apples, and berries in 
our gardens. What do children write with at school? 
Answer ... Question ...? We get butter from cream. 
What do people drink wine from? Answer ... Question 
...? Knives are used for cutting meat. 
245 
Chapter Twenty-Eight (28). 
The Twenty-Eighth (28th) Chapter. 
a great many = 
very many 
to each other = 
one to the other 
bad = not good 
IN THE TRAIN TO LONDON 
Mr. Miller and the three friends were going ashore 
mistd mild dnd ba pri: frendz wd: gouirj a'fo: 
from the steamer. Just before the travellers left the 
frdm bd sti:md. d$ASt btfo: bd travlaz left bd 
steamer, a great many porters came on board to take 
sti:md, d greit meni po:tdz keim on bo:d ta teik 
the travellers' luggage ashore. Some of them were 
ba trcevlaz lAgid$ a'fo:. SAm av bam wa: 
speaking together. 
spi.kirj ta'geba. 
Brown: “I heard the porters talk English to each 
braun: “ai ha:d ba po:taz to:k itjglif tu i:tj 
other; I wonder why I did not understand a word of 
a bd; ai WAnda hwai ai did not Anda'stand a wa:d av 
what they said.” Mr. Miller: “I don't wonder. It 
hwot bei sed. )} mist a mila: “ai dount WAnda. it 
would have been a wonder if you had understood what 
wud hav bi:n a WAnda if ju: had And a'stud hwot 
they said. I can tell you that these porters are not 
bei sed. ai kan tel ju: bat bi:z po:taz a: not 
very good at speaking English. Their English is bad; 
veri gud at spi:kiy iyglif • bear iyglif iz bad; 
246 
that is why you did not understand them. An 
bat iz hwai ju: did not Anda'stand bam. an 
The Twenty-Eighth (28th) Chapter. 
Englishman who speaks his language well, you would 
ifjglijmdn hu: spi:ks hiz Iceygwid^ wel, ju: wud 
understand better.” 
Anda'stcend beta.’* 
Brown: “Are you still feeling bad, Wood? You look 
braun: “a: ju: stil fi:liy bced, wud? ju: luk 
a little pale still. I think that the very best thing for 
a litl peil stil. ai piyk ddt da veri best piy fa 
you to do would be to sleep a little in the train.” 
ju: ta du: wud bi: ta sli:p a litl in da trein” 
Wood: “No, I am already feeling much better.” 
wud: “nou, ai am a:Vredi fi:liy niAtf beta” 
They were all glad to get ashore from the steamer. 
del wa:r a:l glced ta get a'fa: fram da sti:ma. 
Brown asked Mr. Miller what they would have to do 
braun a:skt mista mila hwat dei wud hcev ta du: 
now, and he answered that first they would have to 
nau, and hi: a:nsad dat fa:st dei wud hcev ta 
go to the custom-house to get their luggage through 
gou ta da kAstamhaus ta get dea l^gid^ pru: 
the Customs. When they got to the custom-house, they 
da kAstamz. hwen dei gat ta da kAstamhaus, dei 
were asked, “Have you anything to declare?” and at 
wa:r a:skt y “ha>v ju: enipiy ta di'kka?” and at 
the same time they were shown a list of things on 
da seim taim dei wa: foun a list av piyz an 
which duty must be paid. Brown: “Mr. Miller, what 
hwitf dju:ti mASt bi: peid. braun: u mist a mila, hwat 
very good 
much better 
very best 
The boy is very 
good at speaking 
English. 
His brother is 
much better at it. 
Their father is the 
very best at it. 
247 
Chapter Twenty-Eight (28). 
He may, he might 
[mei, mait]. 
We are through = 
we have finished. 
passport = a piece 
of paper or a small 
book that shows 
who you are 
does the word ‘declare’ mean?” Mr. Miller: “It means 
dxz da wd:d c di'klea y mi:n?” mista mih: “it ini:nz 
to tell whether you have anything to pay duty on, and 
td tel Irweda ju: hcev cnipiy ta pci dju:ti an. and 
on that piece of paper is a list of all the things on which 
an dcet pi:s av peipa iz a list av a:l da piyz an Jnvitf 
duty must be paid.” All four: “We have nothing to 
dju:ti uiASt bi: peid” a:l fa:: “wi: hcev nxpiy ta 
declare.” “All right, then you may go through.” 
di'klea” “a:l rait, den ju: mei gou pru:” 
When they came out, Mr. Miller said, “We are not 
hwen dei keim aut, mist a mih sed, “wi: a: nat 
through yet; now we must go to the passport office. If 
pru: jet; nan wi: mxst gou ta da pa:spa:t afis. if 
they find our passports all right there, we may go on 
dei faind aua pa:spa:ts a:l rait dea, wi: mei gou an 
into England.” As soon as they entered the office, a 
intu iygland.” az su:n az dei entad di afis, a 
man took their passports and looked at them. Then he 
mcen tuk dea pa:spa:ts and lukt cet dam. den hi: 
asked, “Why have you come to England?” Mr. Miller: 
a:skt, “hwai hav ju: kx m tu iy gland?” mist a mila: 
“We have come here for a fortnight’s holidays.” “Where 
“wi: hav kxm hia far a fa:tnaits halidiz” “hwear 
are you going to?” Mr. Miller: “We are going to 
a: ju: gouiy tu?” mista mila: “wi: a: gouiy ta 
London*” “And where are you going to live?” Mr. 
Ixndan” “and hwear a: ju: gouiy ta liv?” mista 
248 
The Twenty-Eighth (28th) Chapter. 
Miller shows him a letter from which it may be seen 
mila jouz him a lei 3 frdm hwitj it mei hi: si:n 
that he has ordered rooms for four at a hotel in London. 
ddt hi: haz a: dad rumiz fd jo: at d hou'tel in Ixndan. 
“Thank you, you may go through.” 
“pceyk jit:, ju: mei gou pru:” 
As soon as they had left the passport office, they went 
az sum dz dei had left da pa:spa:t jfis, dei went 
to the train which was to take them to London. Wood: 
ta da trein hwitj waz ta teik dam ta Ixndan. wud: 
“I do not think there is so much room in this train as 
(( ai du: rut piyk dear iz sou mxtf ru:m in dis trein az 
in ours at home.” Mr. Miller: “No, you are right; 
in auaz at houm” mista mila: “nou, ju: a: rait; 
the English trains are narrower than those of most 
di iijglif treinz a: nceroua dan douz av moust 
other countries.” Storm: “But they go very fast, much 
\da kxntriz” stami: (C bxt dei gou veri fa:st, mxtf 
faster than ours at home.” Brown: “Yes, of all the 
fa:sta dan auaz at houm ” hraun: iC jes, av o:l da 
trains in Europe the English go fastest, I think. At 
treinz in juarap di iyglij gou fa:stist, ai piyk. at 
this speed we shall be in London in a short time.” 
dis spi:d iid: fal hi: in Ixndan in a fa:t taim” 
Wood: “That is fine, for the steamer went very 
wud: “deet iz fain, fa da stimia went veri 
slowly.” 
slouli” 
fast 
faster 
fastest 
The train goes 
fast. 
It goes faster than 
ours at home. 
The trains in Eng¬ 
land go fastest. 
249 
Chapter Twenty-Eight (28). 
slowly 
more slowly 
most slowly 
The steamer went 
slowly. 
It went more 
slowly than last 
time. 
It went most 
slowly twelve 
years ago. 
very fast 
very slowly 
much faster 
much more slowly 
The trains go 
very fast 
The steamer went 
very slowly. 
The trains go 
much faster than 
at home. 
The steamer went 
much more slowly 
than last time. 
all over = in 
every place 
They live on the 
grass = they get 
no other food than 
the grass. 
Mr. Miller: “Yes, it went much more slowly than last 
mistd mild: “jes, it went m\tj ///.>; slouli dan la:st 
time I came to England. But it went most slowly 
taint ai keim tu itjghnd. b.\t it went nioust slouli 
when once, twelve years ago, 1 was coming to England. 
hwen waus, twclv jiaz a'gou, ai waz JcAiniij tu itjgland. 
Then the wind was the very strongest and the waves 
den da wind waz da veri straygist and da weivz 
the very biggest I ever saw on a trip to England.” 
da veri bigist ai cva sa: an a trip tu iy gland” 
Storm: “What large fields of grass they have in this 
sta:m: u hwat la:d$ fi:ldz av gra:s dei hcev in dis 
country! And how many there are of them! Three 
kAntri! and hau meni dear a: av dam! pri: 
fields out of four have grass! And there are a great 
fi'.ldz ant av fa: hcev gra:s! and dear a: a greit 
many sheep in some of them.” 
meni fi:p in saiu av dam ” 
Mr. Miller: “Yes, the English have large fields of grass 
niista mil a: (C jes, di iyglif hcev la:d$ fi:ldz av gra:s 
all over the country, and in many places there are sheep 
a:l ouva da kAntri, and in meni pleisiz dear a: fi:p 
which live on the grass.” Storm: “But what about corn? 
hwitf liv an da gra.s.” sta:m: u b\t hwat a'baut ka:n? 
The people in this country cannot live on the corn 
da pi:pl in dis kAntri kcenat liv an da ka:n 
they have in their fields. I have seen some fields 
dei hcev in dea fi'.ldz. ai hav si:n s.\m fi'.ldz 
250 
' The Twenty-Eighth (28th) Chapter. 
of corn from the train, but there cannot be enough for 
av ka:n fram da trcin, b\t dea kcenat bi: i'n\f fa 
45,000,000 people.” 
fa:ti'faiv iniljan pi'.pl” 
Mr. Miller: “When I was in England years ago, I think 
mista niila: “hwen ai was in iygland jiaz a'gou, ai j>iyk 
that nine fields out of ten had grass. There are now 
dat min fi:ldz ant av ten heed gra:s. dear a: nan 
many more fields with corn than before. But, as you 
meni ma: fi:ldz wid ka:n dan bi'fa :. b\t, az jit: 
say, there is not enough corn for 45,000,000 people. 
sei, dear iz not i x n\f ka:n fa fa:ti'faiv iniljan pi:pi. 
The English get much of their corn from foreign 
di iyglif get niAtf av dea ka:n fram farm 
countries. And not only corn, but butter, eggs, and 
kxntriz. and nat ounli ka:n, b.\t bxta, egz, and 
meat as well.” Wood: “But why did they have nine 
/ ni:t az ivcl” zvnd: u bAt hwai did dei heev nain 
fields out of ten with grass?” 
fi:ldz ant av ten wid gra:s?” 
Mr. Miller: “For many years, much of the land was 
mist a mil a: “fa mcni jiaz, mAtf av da leend waz 
in the hands of only a few people, and they were not 
in da Jiccndz av onnli a fju: pi:pi, and dei wa: nat 
much interested in growing corn. They went out 
m\tj intristid in groniy ka:n. dei went ant 
hunting in the fields and in the woods. But nowadays, 
IiAntiij in da fi.ldz and in da wndz. bAt nauadeiz, 
He grows, he grew, 
he has grown 
[grous, gru:, groun]. 
nowadays = at the 
present time 
251 
Chapter Twenty-Eight (28). 
There are more 
people who own 
the land = the 
land is in the 
hands of more 
people. 
umd, 
there are more people who own the land. Many of 
dear a: mo: pi:pi hu: oun do land. meni ov 
these people are interested in growing corn instead of 
di:z pi:pi a:r intristid in grouiy ko:n in'sted dv 
having fields of grass, so there are more fields of corn 
haviy fi:ldz ov >gra:s, sou dear a: mo: fi:ldz ov ko:n 
than there were at one time. Then there is another 
dan dea wa:r at wau taim. den dear iz a'nxda 
thing, too. From the year 1939 until the 
pig, tu:. fram da jia nainti:n pa:ti'nain a h' til da 
year 1945, it was very difficult for England 
jia nainti:nfo:ti'faiv, it waz veri difikalt far lygland 
to get corn from other countries. It was important 
ta get ko:n fram Ada kAntriz. it waz im'po:tant 
for England to grow more corn, so that many of the 
far iy gland ta grou mo: ko:n, sou dat meni av da 
fields that had grass at one time, now have corn instead 
fi:ldz dat had gra:s at wAn taim, nau hav ko:n in'sted 
of grass.” 
av gra:s.” 
Wood: “Have they any woods in England?” Mr. Miller: 
wud: “hav dei eni wudz in iy gland?” mist a mila: 
“Yes, they have a great many woods, some of them 
“jes, dei hav a greit meni wudz, sAm av dam 
owned by rich people. But before 1939, 
ound bai ritj pi:pi. b\t bi'fo: nainti:n pa:ti'nain, 
they did not make much use of the trees in their woods. 
dei did not meik mAtf ju:s av da tri:z in dea wudz. 
252 
The Twenty-Eighth (28th) Chapter. 
From 1939 to 1945 it was im- 
fram nain ti: n pa: ti' nain ta nainti: n fo: ti'faiv it waz ini - 
possible to get things from Sweden and Finland. In 
'posabl td get piyz fram swi:dn and finland. in 
those years the English had to make more use of their 
bouz jiaz di iyglif heed ta meik mo: ju:s av bear 
own trees. I think that the English are more interested 
oun tri:z. ai piyk bat bi iyglif a: mo:r intristid 
in shooting birds and other animals in their woods.” 
in fu:tiy ha:ds and Abar eenimalz in be a wudz” 
Urd 
He shoots, he 
shot, he has shot 
[fu:ts, jot, 
jot]. 
Storm: “What do they shoot with? I don’t know that 
storm: “hwot du: bei ju:t zvib? ai dount nou beet 
word in English.” Mr. Miller: “It is called a gun. The 
wa:d in iyglif ” mist a mil a: “it iz ko:ld a g\n. bi 
English are also very interested in hunting foxes, but 
iyglif a:r o:lsou veri intristid in h\ntiy foksiz, b\t 
they do not shoot the foxes with guns.” 
bei du: not fu:t ba foksiz wib gxnz ." 
Wood: “No, I have heard that rich English people like 
wud: “nou, ai hav ha:d bat ritf iyglif pi:pl laik 
fox-hunting very much, and that they hunt the foxes 
foksh\ntiy veri mAtf, and bat bei JiAnt ba foksiz 
on horseback with hounds, as the dogs are called which 
on ho:sbeek wib haundz, az ba dogz a: ko:ld hwitf 
on Horseback = 
on the back of a 
horse 
they use for this. They ride on their horses after the 
bei ju:z fa bis. bei raid on be a ho:siz a:fta ba 
hound = dog used 
for hunting 
He rides, he rode, 
he has ridden 
[raidz, roud, ridn ]. 
fox, and the hounds run after it, too. The fox tries 
foks, and ba haundz r\n a:ftar it, tu:. ba foks traiz 
253 
Chapter Twenty-Eight (28). 
He runs, he ran, 
he has run 
[r\ns, ran , taw ]. 
ta run away, but it cannot run so fast as the horses 
o 
ta r\n a'wei, b\t it kccnat r\n son fa:st az da ha:siz 
and the hounds, and at last it must give up running, 
and da haundz, and at lci:st it mAst giv a p rAniy, 
and the hounds get it.” 
and da haundz get it* 
Mr. Miller: “Yes, that is right. And don’t forget that 
mist a mila: “jes, dcet iz rait. and dount fa'get dat 
it is only the dogs used for hunting which are called 
it iz ounli da dagz ju:zd fa hAntiy hwitf a: ka:ld 
hounds. You will find that many Englishmen like to 
haundz. ju: wil faind dat meni iyglifman laik ta 
go out shooting. They go out with their guns to shoot 
gou ant fu:tiy. dei gou aut wid dea g\nz ta fu:t 
birds and other animals. But people go out shooting 
ba:dz and Adar cenimalz. bAt pi:pi gou aut ju:tiy 
in every country. I have sometimes shot birds at home 
in evri k'Antri. ai hav SAmtaimz fat ba:dz at houm 
myself.” 
tnci'self” 
Storm: “That may be so; but instead of that I would 
sta:m: “dcet mei bi: sou ; bAt in'sted av dcet ai wud 
rather take a good walk in the woods and look at the 
ra:da teik a gud wa:k in da wudz and luk at da 
trees and the many beautiful birds.” 
tri:z and da meni bju:taful ba:dz. 3} 
254 
The Twenty-Eighth (28th) Chapter. 
EXERCISE A. 
When the steamer arrived in England, the travellers 
went —. The luggage was taken — by the —. Most 
of the — in England speak very — English. Storm had 
been — bad when the — were high out at sea, but 
now he was — better. Our four travellers did not 
have anything to — at the Customs. Before they could 
get into England, they had to show their — at the — 
office. The man at the passport office asked them 
several —. After they had — these, he said to them, 
“You — go through.” 
Can the people in England — on the — from their 
com fields? No, they have to get corn as well as —, 
—, and — from — countries. What do the English 
have in their fields-corn? They have — in their 
fields. How do rich Englishmen go —? They ride 
on — and have —. The fox tries to — away, but the 
horses and the hounds run — than the fox. Do these 
Englishmen also like to go —? Yes, they — birds 
and other animals with their —. Had Mr. Miller — 
any birds himself? Yes, he sometimes went — him¬ 
self, but Storm would — take a good — in the —. 
EXERCISE B. 
What was Brown wondering at when he heard the 
English porters talk to each other? ... Whom did Mr. 
Miller say that they would have understood better? ... 
WORDS: 
ashore 
a great many 
porter 
each other 
wonder (verb) 
wonder 
anything 
bad 
declare 
list 
may 
might 
on 
passport office 
passport 
live on 
grow 
grew 
grown 
hunt 
fox-hunting 
fox 
wood 
own (verb) 
nowadays 
instead of 
on horseback 
dog 
hound 
ride 
rode 
ridden 
255 
Chapter Twenty-Eight (28). 
run 
ran 
shoot 
shot 
gun 
bird 
room 
very 
all over 
why 
look (verb) 
Englishman 
Did the English trains look like those of their own 
country? ... What might be seen from the letter which 
Mr. Miller showed to the man at the passport office? 
... Are there many people who own land nowadays in 
England? ... What do the English often use their woods 
for? ... Why don’t the English have more corn on their 
land? ... What animals live on the grass of the fields? ... 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with ‘which*. 
Which of the months of the year is the first? Answer ... 
Question...? Saturday is the last day of the week. 
Which is the oldest person of our four travellers? 
Answer ... Question...? Baby is the youngest person 
in the Smith family. In which of the rooms do we 
take our meals? Answer ... Question ...? We get milk 
from the cows, not from the sheep. Which of the four 
travellers got seasick? Answer ... Question ...? John 
and Helen go to school. Which do you like better, to 
travel by steamer or to travel by train? Answer... 
Question ...? I like to read better than I like to writ^. 
Which route is the shortest to England? Answer... 
Question ... ? Esbjerg-Harwich, The Hook of Holland- 
Harwich, and Calais-Dover are the most important 
routes. 
256 
Chapter Twenty-Nine (29). 
The Twenty-Ninth (29th) Chapter. 
IN LONDON 
Wood: “It seems to me that there are so many trains 
wud: “it si:mz ta mi: dat dear a: sou meni treinz 
now. Every minute a train goes past us.” Storm: 
nau. evri minit a trein gouz pa:st as ." sta:m: 
“Yes, it seems that we are near London now.” Mr. 
“jes, it si:mz dat zvi: a: nia l And an nau” mist a 
Miller: “We are not only near London; we are in Greater 
mil a: “wi: a: not ounli nia l And an; zvi: a:r in greita 
London.” Brown: “I have never seen so many trains 
lAndan” braun: “ai hav neva si:n sou meni treinz 
before. It seems as if there is no end to them. And 
bi'fa:. it si:mz az if dear iz nou end ta dam. and 
all the trains which go in the opposite direction are 
a:l da treinz hwitf gou in di apazit dtrekfan a: 
so filled with people that many of them cannot find 
sou fild zvid pi:pi dat meni av dam kcenat faind 
any seats and have to stand on their feet, but in the 
eni si:ts and hcev ta stand an dea fi:t, bAt in da 
trains going in the same direction as we go there are 
treinz gouirj in da seim di'rekfan az zvi: gou dear a: 
so few people that they are almost empty.” 
sou fju: pi:pl dat dei a:r a.lmoust emti” 
Mr. Miller: “Yes, and no wonder! The trains going 
mist a mila: “jes, and non w\nda! da treinz gouirj 
Greater London = 
London itself to¬ 
gether with the 
places near the 
town 
filled with = 
full of 
He stands, he 
stood, he has stood 
[stands, stud, stud]. 
the trains going 
in the same direc¬ 
tion = the trains 
which go in the 
same direction 
257 
Chapter Twenty-Nine (29). 
way (here) = 
direction 
the main stations 
= the most im¬ 
portant stations 
started countings 
started to count 
in the opposite direction come from London, and all 
in di opazit di'rekjan k\m fram l\ndan, and o:l 
the people in them are going home from work. Re¬ 
cta pi:pi in dam a: gouiy honm .fram wa:k. ri- 
member it is past five o'clock now. At this time of 
'memba it iz pa:st faiv a'khk nau. at dis taim av 
the day every one is leaving London, and no one is 
da dei evri wah iz li:virj l And an, and nou WAn iz 
going the opposite way. That is why all the trains 
gouiy di opazit wei. dcet iz hwai o:l da treinz 
going up to London are almost empty.” 
gouiy Ap ta l\ndan air oilmoust cmti” 
A little later they arrived at one of the main stations 
a litl leita dei a'raivd at wah av da mein steifanz 
of London. It was a very large building. A great 
av lAndan. it waz a veri laid 3 bildiy. a greit 
many people were standing on the platforms, waiting 
meni pi:pi wa: stcendiy on da plcetfoimz, weitiy 
for their trains. 
fa dea treinz. 
Wood: “How many platforms do you think there are?” 
umd: (C hau mcni plcetfoimz du: ju: piyk dear a:?” 
Storm: “Let us try to count them.” They all started 
stoun: <( let as trai ta kaunt dam.'- dei o:l staitid 
counting. 
kaunt iy. 
Storm: “What a great number! I counted twenty- 
stoim: (i hwot a greit nxmba! ai kauntid twenti- 
258 
The Twenty-Ninth (29th) Chapter. 
four (24).” Wood: “Then you must add one to your 
'fo: .” wud: “den ju: mAst ced w\n ta jo: 
number, for I counted twenty-five (25).” 
nAmba, far ai kauntid twenti'faiv.” 
Storm: “Well, Brown, tell us the right number now. 
sto:m: “wcl, braun, tel as da rait nAmba nan. 
How many did you count?” Brown: “You must add one 
hau meni did ju: kaunt?” braun: “ju: mAst ced wah 
to Wood’s number. I think there are twenty-six (26).” 
ta wudz nAmba. ai pitgk dear a: twenti'siks . 33 
Mr. Miller: “Well, we know that there are between 
mist a mila: “wel, wi: nou dat dear a: bi'twi.n 
twenty (20) and thirty (30). Some of the main stations 
twenti and pa:ti. sAm av da mein steifanz 
of London — and there are eleven or twelve of them — 
av lAndan — and dear a: i'levn o: twelv av dam — 
have between twenty (20) and thirty (30) platforms.” 
hcev bi'twi'.n twenti and pa:ti plcetfo:mz . 33 
Many porters were very busy, working on the platforms. 
meni po:taz wa: veri bizi, wa: kit} on da plcetfo:mz. 
As soon as a train stopped at a platform, some of them 
az su:n az a trein stopt at a plcetfo.m, SAin av dam 
were ready to take the travellers’ luggage, and already 
wa: redi ta teik da trcezdaz lAgid 3, and o.l'redi 
before the train of our four travellers had stopped, one 
bi'fo: da trein av ana fo: trcevlaz had stopt, WAn 
had got into it. He came up to them and asked them if 
had got intu it. hi: keim a p ta dam and a:skt dam if 
8/2 
259 
Chapter Twenty-Nine (29). 
off = down from 
He builds, he built, 
he has buUt [bilds, 
hilt, bilt]. 
he might help them to carry their luggage. 
hi: mait help dam td keen dea lAgid$. 
Mr. Miller: “No, thank you, we have only one bag each, 
nrsta mila: “nou, pceyk ju:, wi: hcev ounli wah bceg i:tj, 
so we can easily carry them without your help.” When 
sou wi: kan i.zili kceri dam wid'aut jo: help ” hwen 
they had got off the train, Mr. Miller said, “Now we 
dci had gat a:f da trein, mista mila sed, “nau ivi: 
will go by an Underground train to the part of London 
wil gou bai an Andagraund trein ta da pa:t av l And an 
where our hotel is.” Wood: “Underground? What does 
hwear aua hou'tel iz” wud: “Andagraundf hwat dAZ 
that mean?” 
deet mi:n?” 
Mr. Miller: “The Underground is a railway which is 
mista mila: “di Andagraund iz a reilwei hwitf iz 
built under the streets and buildings of London. You 
bill a nda da stri:ts and bildiyz av L\ndan. ju: 
can go to many places in London by Underground.” 
kan gou ta meni pleisiz in l And an bai Andagraund” 
Wood: “Isn't it a wonder to think that they can build 
wud: {C iznt it a WAnda ta piyk dat dei kan bild 
railways under the streets and buildings of a large city?” 
reilzveiz And a da stri.ts and bildiyz av a la:d$ sitif ” 
Just then a train arrived at the Underground station. 
d^Ast den a trein a'raivd at di Andagraund steijan. 
Wood: “There is a train. Let us run.” He began to 
wud: “dear iz a trein. let as rAn” hi: bi'gcen ta 
260 
The Twenty-Ninth (29th) Chapter. 
run along the platform, but it was too late. Just before 
r\n e'lay da plcetfa:m, b\t it tvaz tu: leit. d$ASt bi'fa: 
he got to the door, it closed, and off the train went. 
hi: gat ta da da:, it klouzd, and a:f da trein went. 
Wood: “Oh, I am sorry that we were late for it; now 
witd: “on, ai am sari dat wi: wa: leit far it; nau 
we must wait for the next train.” Mr. Miller: “You 
wi: niAst wcit fa da nekst trein / 9 mista mile: “ju: 
need not be sorry about that. We shall not have to 
ni:d nat hi: sari a'baut dcet. wi: fel nat heev ta 
wait very long.” Two minutes later another train 
weit veri lay” tu: minits leita a'nAda trein 
arrived. When they had got into it, Brown tried to 
e'raivd. hwen dei had gat intu it, braun traid ta 
close the door, but Mr. Miller said, “You need not close 
klous da da:, bAt mista mile sed, “ju: ni:d nat klouz 
it; the doors close of themselves.” The train was so 
it: da da:z klouz av dam'selvz.” da trein waz sou 
filled with people that there were no seats empty. 
fild wid pi:pi dat dea wa: nou si:ts emti. 
Mr. Miller and the three young men had to stand, but 
mista mile and da pri: jAy men heed ta stcend, bAt 
it was only for a few minutes. They soon arrived at 
it waz ounli far a fju: minits. dei sum e'raivd at 
Tottenham Court Road Station, where they got off the 
tatnam ka:t roud steifan, hwea dei gat a:f da 
train. As the hotel was only five minutes from the 
trein. az da hou'tel waz ounli faiv minits fram da 
261 
Chapter Twenty-Nine (29). 
station, they decided to walk. While they were walking 
steifdn, dei d-f said-id ta wa:k. hwail dei wa: wa:kiy 
along, the three young men told Mr. Miller that now 
a 1 lay, da pri: jAy men tould mista mila dat nau 
they found that they understood much of the language. 
dei fannd dat dei Anda'stud mAtf av da laygwid 3. 
While they were standing in the Underground train, 
hwail dei wa: stcendirj in di And a ground trein, 
they had heard some people from an office talking 
dei had ha:d saw pi: pi fram an of is ta:kiy 
together, and they had understood most of what they 
ta'geda, and dei had Anda'stud moust av hwot dei 
said. Mr. Miller: “That was what I told you. Many 
sed. mista mila: “dat was hwat ai tould ju:. meni 
porters speak bad English, and that is very difficult 
po:taz spi:k heed iyglif, and dat is veri difikalt 
as spoken = in the 
way in which it is 
spoken 
for you to understand, but English as spoken by people 
fa ju: tu And a 1 st and, bAt iyglif as spoukanbai pi: pi 
working in an office, for example, will not be so difficult. 
wa: kiy in an afis, far ig'sa:mpl, wil nat bi: sou difikalt. 
You will soon find that you can understand very much 
ju: wil su:n faind dat ju: kan Anda'stand veri mAtf 
of what they say.” 
av hwat dei sei” 
262 
The Twenty-Ninth (29th) Chapter. 
EXERCISE A. 
It — to Wood that a train went — them every minute. 
The trains which went in the same — as theirs were 
almost —, but the ones which went in the — direction 
were — with people. The trains were so full of people 
that there were not — enough for all, so that many had 
to — on their feet. The train arrived at one of the — 
stations of London. When they tried to — the platforms, 
they got different —. The porters helped people to 
carry their luggage, but Mr. Miller and the three young 
men had only one — each, so they did not need any —. 
The — is a railway which is — under the streets and 
buildings of London. The doors of the Underground 
trains — of themselves. Why did Wood run — the 
platform? Because a train had just —, and he wanted 
to get into the train. What were the young men talking 
to Mr. Miller about — they were walking to the hotel? 
They were talking about the way in which English is — 
by different people. 
EXERCISE B. 
Are there many people going up to London after five 
o’clock? ... Did they arrive at a small station in Lon¬ 
don? ... What do porters do? ... Did the young men 
and their teacher need any help with their luggage? ... 
How did they get from the main station to their hotel? 
... What was Wood sorry to find? ... Why did they not 
have to close the doors of the Underground train? ... 
Why did they all have to stand in the Underground 
WORDS: 
seem 
past 
opposite 
direction 
filled 
seat 
stand 
stood 
main 
platform 
count 
number 
add 
stop 
help (verb) 
help 
bag 
carry 
Underground 
along 
close 
sorry 
no one 
off 
building 
build 
built 
under 
263 
Chapter Twenty-Nine (29). 
train? ... Is English as spoken by the English porters 
easy to understand? ... Where is the Underground 
built? ... How many platforms were there at the main 
station where they arrived? ... How did the young men 
find out the number of platforms? ... 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with <what 9 
or ‘which 9 . 
What was the idea that Brown got when he was walking 
home from his work? Answer ... Question ...? The 
idea that Mr. Miller had been thinking of was to speak 
English always when they were together. Which did 
Brown smoke, a pipe or a cigarette? Answer ... Question 
...? July is the best month to go to England. What 
did John and Helen take along to the lake? Answer ... 
Question ...? John’s parents gave him a book and a 
football for his birthday. Which of the shirts did George 
get, the ones with broad stripes or the ones with narrow 
stripes? Answer ... Question ...? The younger children 
write with pencils. What museum were they going to 
see? Answer ... Question ...? Mrs. Smith was going 
to put on her new frock for Daisy’s birthday-party. 
Which of the people they heard spoke bad English, the 
porters or the people working in offices? Answer ... 
Question ... ? Mr. Miller and the three young men had 
to stand. In what way did they get from the Under¬ 
ground to the hotel? Answer ... Question ...? They 
got off the Underground train at Tottenham Court Road 
Station. 
264 
Chapter Thirty (30). 
The Thirtieth (<30th) Chapter. 
AT THE HOTEL 
Mr. Miller: “We are now in the street where our hotel 
mist a mila: “wi: a: nau in da stri:t hwear aua hou'tel 
is. All the buildings we have passed the last three or 
iz. o:l da bilditjz wi: hav pa:st da la:st pri: o: 
four minutes, are hotels. This part of the town is well 
for minits, a: hou'telz. dis pa:t av da taun iz wel 
known for its many cheap hotels. It is called Blooms- 
nonn far its meni tfi:p hou'telz. it iz ko:ld blu.mz- 
bury and is situated between the West End and the 
bari and iz sitjueitid bi'twi:n da west end and da 
City. It is an advantage for travellers to live at a 
siti. it iz an ad'va:ntid 3 fa Preevlaz ta liv at a 
hotel in this part of London, because they can get to 
hou'tel in dis pa:t av t And an, bi'koz dei kan get ta 
the big shops and the cinemas and theatres of the West 
da big fops and da sinimaz and piataz av da zvest 
End quickly, and they also have the advantage of being 
end kzvikli, and dei o:lsou heev di ad'va:ntid 3 av bi:iy 
able to get to the offices in the City easily. That was 
eibl ta get ta di ofisiz in da siti i:zili. deet waz 
why I chose this hotel the first time I came to London. 
hwai ai tjouz dis hou'tel da fa:st toim di keim ta l And an. 
I had to choose between several hotels, situated in 
di heed ta tju:z bi'twi.n sevral hou'telz, sitjueitid in 
to pass = to go 
past 
it is situated = 
its place is 
the City = the 
central part of 
London 
It is an advantage 
for you = it is 
better for you. 
theatre 
the advantage of 
being able = the 
advantage to be 
able 
He chooses, he 
chose, he has 
chosen [tfu:ziz, 
tjouz, tfouzn]. 
265 
Chapter Thirty (30). 
a good friend 
mine 
a good friend 
yours 
a good friend 
ours, etc. 
to reply = to 
answer 
I reply, 
he replies, 
he replied, 
but: replying. 
different parts of the town, and I thought this the best 
difrant pa:ts av da taun, dnd ai po:t dis da best 
of 
one to choose. A good friend of mine had recommended 
of wayi ta tfu:z. a gud frend av main had reka'mendid 
of it very much, and since then I have recommended it 
it veri niAtf, and sins den ai hav reka'mendid it 
myself to people who were going to England, as it is 
mat self ta pi: pi hu: zva: gouiy tu iy gland, az it iz 
a good hotel, and very cheap, too. In this way I have 
a gud hou'tel, and veri tji:p, tu:. in dis wei ai hav 
become good friends with the hotel-keeper. But here 
bi'kAm gud frendz mid da hou'telki:pa. bAt hia 
you see the hotel.” 
ju: si: da hou'tel” 
They went inside, and the hotel-keeper, who was sitting 
dei went 'in'said, and da hou'telki.pa , hu: waz sititj 
in his office, greeted Mr. Miller, saying, “Good evening, 
in hiz afis, gri:tid mist a mila, seiiy, “gud i:vnitj, 
Mr. Miller, I am glad to see you in London.” Then he 
mist a mila, ai am glced ta si: ju: in l And an” den hi: 
greeted the three young men with the words, “How 
gri.tid da pri: jAtj men mid da wa:dz, “hau- 
do you do, gentlemen, I am glad to see you, too.” 
dju'du:, dyntlman, ai am glced ta si: ju:, tu:” 
To Mr. Miller’s question about their rooms he replied, 
ta mista milaz kwestjan a'baut dea ru:mz hi: ri'plaid, 
“Your two rooms are ready, Mr. Miller, a single room 
“jo: tu: ru:mz a: redi, mista mila, a siygl ru:m 
266 
The Thirtieth (30th) Chapter. 
for you, and a double room for your three friends. 
fa ju:, and a cIaM ru:m fd jo: pri: frendz. 
I have put an extra bed into the double room, as you 
av hdv put an ekstra bed intd dd d\bl ru:m, dz ju: 
asked me to.” To the three others he explained, 
a:skt mi: tu.” ta dd pri: \ddz hi: iks'pleind, 
“Mr. Miller wanted me to make it as cheap as possible, 
“mista mild wontid mi: td meik it az tfi:p az pasabl , 
and because we are good friends, I agreed to put you 
and bi'kaz zvi: a: gud frendz, ai a'gri:d ta put ju: 
all in a double room and then give you a cheaper price. 
j:I in a d\bl ru:rn and den giv ju: a tfi:pa prais. 
I have never agreed to do that before; therefore I must 
ai haz’ nevar a'gri:d ta du: dcet bi'fa:; deafo:r ai niASt 
ask you not to speak about it to other people.” 
a:sk ju: not ta spi:k a'baut it tu Ada pi:pi.” 
Mr. Miller: “We had better go to our rooms now to 
mist a mila: “zvi: had beta gou tu aua ru:mz nau ta 
wash, and then we should like to have something to eat. 
zvaf, and den zvi: jud laik ta hcev SAMpiy tu i:t. 
When is dinner?” 
hzven iz dinaf” 
Hotel-keeper: “Dinner is served between seven and 
hou'telki.pa: “dinar iz sa:vd bi'tzvi:n sevn and 
eight-thirty (8.30). While we are speaking of meals, 
l eit l pa:ti. hzvail zvi: a: spi:kirj av mi:lz, 
breakfast is served between eight and ten, and lunch 
brekfast iz sa:vd bi'tzvi:n eit and ten } and / am / 
single room = 
room for one per¬ 
son 
double room = 
room for two per¬ 
sons 
to agree to = to 
say ‘yes’ to 
267 
Chapter Thirty (30). 
is served from twelve to two. If you would like a cup 
iz so:vd from twelv td tn:. if ju: wud laik o kAp 
of tea early in the morning when you get up, you can 
dv ti: d:li in dd mo: my hwen ju: get a p, ju: kdn 
easily have one. But perhaps you do not want to 
i:zili hcev wxn. bxt po'hceps ju: du: not wont to 
get up early while you are here? What do you say, 
get Ap o:li hwail ju: a: hid? hwot du: ju: sei, 
gentlemen, do you want to get up early or late in the 
d^entlmon, du: ju: wont to get Ap o:li o: leit in do 
morning?” 
mo:niy?” 
Mr. Miller: “We want to see as much as possible while 
misto mild: “wi: wont to si: oz mxtf oz posdbl hwail 
we are here; therefore we shall get up early in the 
wi: a: hid: deofo: wi: fdl get Ap o:li in dd 
morning.” Hotel-keeper: “Then you can have an early 
mo:niy.” hou'telki:po: (C den ju: kdn hcev dn d:li 
cup of tea if you like. Many Englishmen like to have 
kAp dv ti: if ju: laik. meni iyglifman laik td hcev 
that.” Brown: “That would be a good i<Jea. We should 
dcet” braun: “dcet wud bi: d gud at did. wi: fud 
like to live as far as possible as the English do.” 
laik td liv dz fa:r dz posdbl dz di iyglif du:/’ 
Hotel-keeper: “All right, now I will call the porter and 
hou'telki.pd: “o:l rait, nau ai wil ko:l dd po:td dnd 
tell him to take your bags up to your rooms.” 
tel him td teik jo: bcegz a /> td jo: ru:mz.” 
268 
The Thirtieth (30th) Chapter. 
They were glad to see that they had got a nice large 
dei wa: glad ta si: dat dei had gat a nais la:d$ 
double room with hot and cold running water. Wood: 
dAbl ru:m wid hot and kould rAniy wo:ta. wud: 
“Well, this is going to be our home for the next two 
“wel, dis iz gouiy ta bi: aua houm fa da nekst tu: 
weeks. It is nice here, isn’t it?” 
wi:ks. it iz nais hia, iznt it?” 
Storm: “Yes, and a nice hotel-keeper, too. I think it 
sto:m: “jes, and a nais hou'telki:pa, tu:. ai piyk it 
very nice of him to give us a cheaper price, because we 
veri nais av him ta giv as a tji:pa prais, bi'koz wi: 
are all three in one room, when he has never agreed 
a:r o:l pri: in zva n ru:m, hwen hi: haz nevar a'gri.d 
to that before*” 
ta dat bi'fo:.” 
Brown went to the window and was surprised when 
braun went ta da zvindou and waz sa'proizd hwen 
he looked out of it. “Well, one would not think this 
hi: lukt aut av it. “wel, WAn zvud not piyk dis 
was London. I thought that we should have had a 
waz lAndan. ai po:t dat zvi: fud hav had a 
view from our window of streets full of people, and 
vju: fram aua zvindou av stri. ts ful av pi:pi, and 
that there would be high buildings in all directions. 
dat dea wud bi: hai bildiyz in o:l di'rekfanz. 
Come and have a look at it.” Wood: “Yes, I must say 
kAm and hav a luk at it.” zvud: “jes, ai mAst sei 
269 
Chapter Thirty (30). 
When you work 
much, you get 
tired. 
When you have 
not slept for a 
long time, you get 
sleepy. 
this is very surprising. How beautiful the view is!” 
dis iz veri sa'praiziy. hau bju:tdful da vju: iz!” 
It is no wonder that the three friends were surprised 
it iz non WAndd dat da pri: frendz wa: sa'praizd 
at the view from their window. It was a garden with 
at da vju: fram dea windou. it waz a ga:dn void 
tall trees, and everything was so quiet that it was 
to:l tri:z, and evripiy waz sou kwaiat dat it waz 
difficult for them to understand that they were in 
difikalt fa dam tu And a'stand dat dei wa:r in 
London, the largest city in the world. 
I And an, da la:d$ist siti in da wa:ld. 
Brown: “I think we shall sleep well to-night. It is so 
braun : “ai pirjk wi: jal sli:p wel ta'nait. it iz sou 
quiet here, and I must say that I am a little tired after 
kwaiat hia, and ai niAst sei dat ai am a litl taiad a:fta 
having travelled all day.” 
hceviy travld a:l dei” 
Storm: “Yes, I am both tired and sleepy. Wouldn't it 
sta.rn: “jes, ai am boup taiad and sli:pi. wudnt it 
be a good idea to go to bed shortly after dinner, and 
hi: a gud ai'dia ta gou ta bed jo:tli a:fta dina, and 
then get up early to-morrow morning? I think Mr. Miller 
den get \p a:li ta'nurou mo:nigf ai piyk mista mild 
will agree with us in that.” 
wil a'gri: wid as in dcet” 
And he was right. An hour and a half later they were 
and hi: tvaz rait. an auar and a ha:f leita dei wa:r 
270 
The Thirtieth (30th) Chapter. 
all in their beds, happy, but tired. 
o:l in bed beds, hcepi, b\t taidd. 
EXERCISE A. 
On their way to the hotel Mr. Miller and his pupils — 
many buildings, all of them —. Their hotel was — 
between the West End and the —. Mr. Miller had — 
that hotel because it was good and —. In the West 
End there are many cinemas and —. The hotel-keeper 
— Mr. Miller, saying, “Good evening, I am — to — 
you in London.” What did the — reply when Mr. 
Miller asked about their rooms? He — that a — room 
was ready for Mr. Miller and a — room for his friends. 
Did the hotel-keeper tell them when the meals were —? 
Yes, and he said that they might have a cup of tea — in 
the morning if they liked. Was it a — large room that 
the three young men got? Yes, and they had a beauti¬ 
ful — from their window. Were they — and sleepy 
after having — all day? Yes, and therefore they — to 
go to bed — after dinner. 
EXERCISE B. 
Where was the hotel situated? ... What is Bloomsbury 
known for? ... Why is it an advantage to live at a 
hotel in Bloomsbury? ... Who had recommended the 
hotel to Mr. Miller? ... When was dinner served? ... 
Why were they surprised at the view from their 
window? ... What did they do after dinner? ... Where 
are the biggest shops in London situated? ... How had 
WORDS: 
pass 
situated 
advantage 
theatre 
choose 
chose 
chosen 
recommend 
hotel-keeper 
greet 
single 
double 
reply 
agree 
serve 
early 
nice 
surprise 
view 
tired 
therefore 
sleepy 
shortly 
271 
Chapter Thirty (30). 
Mr. Miller become good friends with the hotel-keeper? 
... Where was the hotel-keeper when Mr. Miller and 
the three young men arrived at the hotel? ... What 
rooms did Mr. Miller and his friends get? ... 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with ‘who’, ‘whom’, 
‘whose’, or ‘which’. 
Who is John's uncle? Answer ... Question ...? The 
sister of Helen's mother is her aunt. Which is the oldest 
person in the Smith family? Answer ... Question ...? 
Mr. Miller is the cleverest at English of our four travel¬ 
lers. Who lives in the country? Answer ... Question ...? 
The French live in France. Which of the girls in the 
Smith family is ten years old? Answer ... Question ...? 
The boy John fell through the ice. Whom did Mr. 
Smith give a football on his last birthday? Answer... 
Question...? Mrs. Smith gave Daisy a pair of silk 
stockings on her birthday. Which of you will bring 
me to-day's newspaper? Answer... Question...? I 
will give you a cigar. Whose house was situated in 
the country? Answer... Question...? Mr. Smith’s 
house was situated in the town. 
272 
Chapter Thirty-One (31). 
The Thirty-First* (31st) Chapter. 
SHOPPING IN LONDON 
The next morning when they were having their break¬ 
er nekst ma:niy hwen dei wa: haviy dea brek- 
fast, they discussed what to do on their first day. 
fast, dei dis'kASt hwat ta du: an dea fa:st dei. 
When they had discussed the question for some time, 
hwen dei had dis'kASt da kwestfan fa SAm taim, 
they agreed to take a long walk through the streets 
dei a'gri.d ta teik a lay wa:k pru: da stri:ts 
of the West End to look at the shops and perhaps go 
ai' da west end ta luk at da faps and pa'haps gou 
shopping themselves. They walked down Charing 
fapiy dam'selvs. dei wa:kt daun tfceriy 
Cross Road, a street which is well known for its many 
kras roud, a stri'.t hwitj is wel noun far its meni 
second-hand book-shops. 
sekandhcend buk fops. 
“You understand,” Mr. Miller explained to them, 
“ju: Anda' standmist a milar iks'pleind ta dam, 
“that you can only buy books second-hand in these 
(C dat ju: kan ounli bai buks 'sekand'hand in di:s 
book-shops. The books have already been bought once 
buk faps. da buks hav ail'redi bi:n ba:t waus 
and read by people, and then sold by them to these 
and red bai pi:pl f and den sould bai dam ta di:s 
to shop -- to go 
buying things in 
shops 
273 
Chapter Thirty-One (31). 
second-hand book-shops. People are only able to get 
sekandhand bukjaps . pi:pl a:r ounli eibl ta get 
pleased = glad 
special = great 
and important 
however = but 
a very low price when they sell second-hand books in 
3 veri lou prais hwen dei sel sekdndhcend buks in 
this way to a book-shop.” 
Sis wei tu d bukfap” 
They stopped to look at some of the books which had 
dei stapt td Ink at s\m av da buks hwitf had 
been put into large boxes outside the shops, and were 
bi:n put inta la:d 3 baksiz 1 aut'said da fops, and wa: 
pleased to find some in their own language. 
pli:zd ta faind saw in dear oun latjgzvid 3. 
The shops with foreign stamps, of which there are a 
da japs wid farin stamps , av hwitf dear a: a 
great number, were of special interest to Wood and 
greit nAmba, wa:r av spefal- intrist ta wud and 
Storm, who had collected stamps for several years. 
sta:in, hu: had ka'lektid stamps fa sevral jiaz. 
“When I started collecting stamps,” said Wood, “I had 
“hwen ai sta:tid ka'lektiy stampssed wud, “ai had 
at first a collection of about a hundred. Since then 
at fa:st a ka'lekjan av a'baut a hAndrad. sins den 
it has grown from year to year, and now I have a 
it haz groun fram jia ta jia, and nau ai hav a 
collection of about 8,000 stamps. However, I do 
ka'lekfan av a'baut eit pauzand stamps . hau'eva, ai du: 
not think it will grow very much during the next few 
nat piijk it zvil grou veri mAtj djuarig da nekst fju: 
274 
The Thirty-First (31st) Chapter. 
years, because I shall not have so much time to spend 
jiaz, bi'koz ai fal not hav sou mAtf taint td spend 
on it. During my first few years as a stamp collector, 
on it. djuariy mai fd:st fju: jiaz dz d stcemp ka'lekta, 
I spent a great part of my time looking at my old 
ai spent d greit pait dv mai taim Inkiij of mai ottld 
stamps and going to the stamp shops for new ones; 
stamps and gouty ta da stcemp fops fa nju: iv.vnz; 
and, therefore, my collection grew very rapidly. rapidly — quickly 
and, deafo:, mai ka'lekfan gru: veri rcrpidli. 
“At school, two of my schoolfellows and I were so 
({ at sku:l, tin av mai skuilfelouz and ai wa: sou 
interested in our foreign stamps that we almost forgot 
intristid in aua forin stamps dat wi: oilmoust fa'got 
our school work. In the afternoon we three school- 
oua skuil zvaik. in di 1 aifta'nmn wii prii skuil- 
fellows used to go to the shops near our homes to look He used to go = 
felottz jmst ta gou ta da fops niar aua houinz ta Ink he often went * 
at the latest foreign stamps and buy as many as we 
at da lei fist forin stamps and bai az meni az wii 
could afford. But now I cannot spend so much time 
kud a'fold. b\t nau ai kanot spend sou niAtf taim 
on my collection, although I am still a very interested 
on mai ka'lekfan, oil'dou ai am stil a veri intristid 
collector. I see they have the latest stamps from 
ka'lekta. ai sii dei hav da leitist stamps fram 
our country in this shop, but the prices are higher 
aua kAntri in dis fop , bAt da praisiz a: haia 
275 
Chapter Thirty-One (31). 
than at home.” 
dan at houm” 
left \riqht i 
When they had walked for some time, they came to 
hwen dei had wo.kt fa s\m taim, dei keim ta 
Shaftesbury Avenue, a road running both ways from 
fa:ftsbari cevinju:, a roud rAnirj boup weiz fram 
Charing Cross Road. Wood: “Shall we turn to the 
tfceritj kros roud. wud: “fal wi: ta:n ta da 
left here, down this street?” 
left hia, daun dis stri:tf” 
Mr. Miller: “No, I think we will turn to the right. 
mist a mila: (C nou, ai pirjk wi: mil ta:n ta da rait. 
Both the street on our left and the street on our right 
boup da stri:t on aua left and da stri:t on aua rait 
are parts of Shaftesbury Avenue. If we turn to the 
a: pa:ts av fa:ftsbari cevinju:. if wi: ta:n ta da 
left, we shall soon get back to the hotel again. There- 
left, wi: fal su:n get bcek ta da hou'tel a'gein. dea- 
fore we will turn to the right, which will take us to 
fo: wi: wil ta:n ta da rait, hwitf wil teik as ta 
Piccadilly = a 
street in the West 
End 
Piccadilly.” 
pika'dili.” 
consequently = 
therefore 
Consequently, they now turned to the right, down 
konsikwantli, dei nau ta:nd ta da rait, daun 
Shaftesbury Avenue. In this part of the town they 
fa:ftsbari cevinju:. in dis pa:t av da taun dei 
noticed that they passed cinema after cinema, and 
non fist dat dei pa:st sinima a:fta sinima, and 
276 
The Thirty-First (31st) Chapter. 
Mr. Miller told his pupils that this part of the town 
mista mile tould his pju:pls ddt dis pa:t dv dd taun 
is so full of cinemas and theatres that the Londoners 
is sou ful dv sinimds and pi at as dat da \\ndanas 
often call it theatre-land. 
a:fn ka:l it piatelmid. 
When they got to Piccadilly, they noticed one shop 
Jnven dei gat ta pika'dili, dei noutist wah jap 
after another with shirts, ties, socks, etc. They spent 
a:ftar a'nAda wid / a:ts, tais, seks, it'setra. dei spent 
a long time going from window to window, looking at 
a lay taint gouiy frein windou ta windou, lukiy at 
all the different articles. 
a:l da difrant a:tikis. 
Storm: “What nice things they have in these shops! 
sta:m: “hwat nais piys dei heev in di:s japs! 
Have you noticed that shirt over there, Brown; how 
hav ju: noutist dcrt fa:t ouva dee, braun; hau 
do you like it? I think I will go in and buy it.” 
du: ju: laik it? ai piyk ai wil gou in and bai it 
Mr. Miller: “No, you had better not, Storm. Money 
mista mile: cc nou, ju: had beta nat, sta:m. niAtii 
for buying shirts is not included in the fifteen pounds 
fa baiiy fa:ts is nat in'klu:did in da fifti.n pounds 
we are going to spend in England. These shirts, and 
wi: a: gouiy ta spend in iygland. di:s ja:ts, and 
a Londoner = a 
person living in 
London 
articles = things 
in a shop 
You had better not 
do it = it is better 
for you not to do 
it. 
all the other articles you see in the shops in Piccadilly, 
a:l di a dar a:tikis ju: si: in da japs in pika'dili , 
277 
Chapter Thirty-One (31). 
are very expensive.” 
a: veri iks'pensiv” 
Some time later Brown asked whether they were near 
s\m taim leitd braun a:skt hweda dei wa: ftia 
Bond Street, as, he said, he took a special interest in 
band striit, az, hi: sed, hi: tuk a spejal intrist in 
seeing that street. 
si:itj dcet stri:t. 
Mr. Miller: “Well, Bond Street was not included in 
mist a mila: “wel, band stri:t waz nat in'klu:did in 
our plans for to-day, but we can pass through it to 
ana plcenz fa ta'dei, b\t wi: kan pa:s pru: it tu 
Oxford Street.” 
aksfad stri:t” 
The three friends were surprised to see the shops in 
da pri: f rends wa: sa'praizd ta si: da faps in 
Bond Street. Many of them were tailors’ shops. Mr. 
band stri:t. meni av dam wa: teilaz faps. mist a 
Miller: “This is a street especially for men’s shopping. 
mila: “dis iz a stri:t is'pefali fa mens fapiy. 
The best tailors in London have their shops in this 
da best teilaz in L\ndan hcev dea faps in dis 
street. But you will notice that no prices are shown 
stri:t. b\t ju: wil noutis dat nou praisiz a: foun 
on the suits of clothes you see in the windows, and I 
an da sju:ts av klondz ju: si: in da windouz, and ai 
will tell you the reason. If you buy a suit of clothes at 
wil tel ju: da ri:zn. if ju: bai a sju:t av klouds at 
278 
The Thirty-First' (31st) Chapter. 
a tailor’s in Bond Street, you will have to pay him 
a teilaz in band stri:t, ju: wil hcev ta pei him 
about twenty guineas for it. Out of the twenty guineas 
a'baut twenti giniz fa:r it. aut av da twenti giniz 
ten, I think, will pay for the suit itself; the other ten 
ten, ai piyk, wil pei fd dd sju:t it'self; di Ada ten 
you pay for the name of ‘Bond Street’. You see that 
ju: pei fa da neim av c band stri:t\ ju: si: dat 
there are good reasons why you should not buy your 
dear a: gud ri:znz hwai ju: fud not bai jo: 
clothes here. However, you must not think that most 
kloudz hid. hau'eva, ju: m\st not piyk dat moust 
Londoners buy their clothes at a Bond Street tailor’s; 
L\ndanaz bai dea kloudz at a band stri:t teilaz; 
only people with lots of money go shopping here. But 
ounli pi:pl wid lots av m\ni gou fopiy hia. b\t 
now I will take you to Selfridge’s, one of the biggest 
nau ai wil teik ju: ta selfridyz, wah av da bigist 
shops in the world. They have lots of different articles 
Japs in da wa:ld. dei hcev lats av difrant a.tiklz 
there, so that people can buy everything from a pin 
dea , sou dat pi:pi kan bai evripiy fram a pin 
to an elephant, as the saying goes, and there you will 
tu an elifant, az da seiiy gouz, and dea ju: wil 
be able to get something for your money.” 
bi: eibl ta get s Amply fa ja: MAni.” 
Our four travellers spent an hour or two in Selfridge’s, 
aua fa: trcevlaz spent an auar a: tu: in selfrid^iz, 
a guinea = 21 
shillings 
a lot = a great 
many 
\pin 
as the saying goes 
= as people say 
etephont 
279 
Chapter Thirty-One (31). 
You see a person 
smile. 
You hear a person 
laugh. 
WORDS: 
discuss 
pleased 
stamp 
second-hand 
collect 
collection 
collector 
grow 
rapidly 
schoolfellow 
buying sticks, handkerchiefs, and cigarettes. When they 
baiirj stiks, hceykdtjifs, and sigdWets. hwen dei 
came out again, Wood said to Storm, “How do you like 
keim aut d'gcin, wud sed td sto:m , “hau du: ju: laik 
my new stick? With this in my right hand, I feel that 
max nju: stik? wid dis in mai rait hand, ai fi:l ddt 
I could walk to the end of the world.” He saw Mr. 
ai kud wo:k td di end dv dd wd:ld” hi: sj: mistd 
Miller smile, and then heard him laugh, saying: “I am 
mild small, dnd den hd:d him la:f, seiig: (( ai dm 
sure you could. However, I think we have bought 
fud ju: kud. hau'evd, ai piyk zvi: Juv l?j:t 
enough for to-day. Now let us go home through Oxford 
tn\f fd td'dei. nau let as gou houm pru: jksfdd 
Street; a cup of tea would do us good.” 
stri.t; d kAp dv ti: wud du: as gud” 
EXERCISE A. 
The first morning our four friends were in London 
they decided to go — in the West End. Charing Cross 
Road is well known for its many — book-shops and shops 
with foreign —. These shops were of great — to Storm 
and Wood, who were both stamp —. Wood’s first — of 
stamps was only small, but it has — from year to year to 
about 8,000 stamps, because he has — much time on it 
together with two of his old —. When they came to 
Shaftesbury Avenue, they — to the —. If they had — 
to the —, they would have got back to the hotel again. 
280 
The Thirty-First (31st) Chapter. 
Londoners often call the part of the town near Shaftes¬ 
bury Avenue —, because there are so many cinemas 
and — there. In Piccadilly they — that there were 
many men’s shops, and there were many of the different 
— in the windows that they would — to buy, but Mr. 
Miller told them that money for that was not — in 
their fifteen pounds. The — why they should not buy 
their clothes at a Bond Street — shop was that half 
of the price was for the name, Mr. Miller explained. 
It is only people with — of money who go shopping here. 
EXERCISE B. 
What did Mr. Miller and his pupils discuss the first 
morning in London? ... What did they agree to do? ... 
What, is a second-hand book-shop? ... Why were the 
stamp shops of special interest to Wood and Storm? ... 
What is theatre-land? ... Why did Mr. Miller tell Storm 
that he had better not buy the shirt he liked so well? 
... What shops do you especially find in Bond Street? ... 
What is the reason why prices are not shown in the Bond 
Street tailors’ windows? ... What people go shopping 
in Bond Street? ... What is Self ridge’s? ... What do 
people say about Selfridge’s?... 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with ‘is, are, was, 
were, has, have, had 9 . 
Are you English? Answer ... Question ...? Yes, Mr. 
Miller is the teacher of the three young men. Has Mr. 
turn 
right 
left 
notice 
include 
tailor 
reason 
guinea 
lot 
pin 
elephant 
stick 
interest 
cross 
consequently 
article 
shop (verb) 
however 
special 
avenue 
Londoner 
saying 
laugh 
over 
book-shop 
281 
Chapter Thirty-One (31). 
Miller a son? Answer ... Question ...? No, the young 
men have no wives to think of. Was Mrs. Smith the only 
guest at Daisy’s birthday party? Answer ... Question 
...? No, Mrs. Miller and the boy were not with them 
in England. Had John a watch? Answer ... Question 
...? No, they had not enough money for the trip. Was 
Mrs. Miller ever in England? Answer ... Question ...? 
Yes, they were at Selfridge’s, a big shop where they 
bought several things. Has Mr. Miller had the young 
men as his pupils before? Answer ... Question ...? Yes, 
Mr. and Mrs. Miller have had rooms at the same hotel 
where the young men are now. Had Mr. Miller’s boy 
been at his grandparents’ home before? Answer ... 
Question ...? Yes, the young men had been at school 
together as boys. Had Mrs. Smith had her watch for 
a long time? Answer ... Question ...? Yes, they had 
had breakfast when they started on their shopping trip. 
282 
Chapter Thirty-Two (32). 
The Thirty-Second (32nd) Chapter. 
A TRIP UP THE RIVER 
1 
fW 
The next day Mr. Miller proposed a trip up the river 
da nekst dei mista mite pra'pouzd a trip \p da viva 
palace 
Thames to Hampton Court Palace. “We can go down 
temz ta hcemtan ka: t pcelis. “wi: kan gou daun 
to Westminster Bridge,” he said, “and take the boat 
ta westminsta brid$” hi: sed, “and tcik da bout 
from there. Westminster Bridge is one of the many 
fram dea. westminsta brid$ iz wah av da meni 
boat i? 
bridges that go across the river and connect North 
bridyz dat gou a'kras da viva and ka'nekt na:p 
London with South London. We can go across the 
Ixndan wid saup tend an wi: kan gou a'kras da 
river to look at that part of the town some other day.” 
riva ta Ink at dcet pa:t av da taun saw Ada dei” 
When they got on board, they noticed a board on which 
hwen dei gat an ba:d , dei noutist a ba:d an hwitf 
were given the names of the different places where the 
wa: givn da neimz av da difrant pleisiz hwea da 
boat was going to. They walked across to read the 
bout waz gouiy tu. dei wa:kt a'kras ta ri:d da 
notice on the board, and Brown noticed that the boat 
noutis an da ba:d, and braun noutist dat da bout 
the notice = that 
which was written 
on the board 
was going to Oxford, the town in which the great 
ivaz gouiy tu aksfad, da taun in hwitf da greit 
Chapter Thirty-Two (32). 
English university is situated. 
irjglij juni'va:siti iz sitjueitid. 
Mr. Miller explained to them that there are thousands 
mista milar iks'pleind ta darn dat dear a: pausandz 
of students from all over the world who study at this 
av stju:dants fram o:l ouva da zva:ld hu: st\di at dis 
old university, and that they are taught by a great 
ould juni'va:siti , and dat dei a: to:t bai a greit 
many professors. After having read the notice, he 
meni pra'fesaz. a:fta Jueviy red da noutis, hi: 
said, “It seems that every day during the spring and 
sed , (( it si:ms dat evri dei djuariy da spriy and 
summer there is a boat to Oxford.” “It must be a 
s\ma dear is a bout tu oksfad” (( it mAst bi: a 
lovely trip up the river,” Wood said, “I propose that 
IavU trip a p da riva” wud sed, “ai pra'pouz dat 
we try the trip. It isn't very far to Oxford, is it?” 
wi: trai da trip. it iznt veri fa: tu oksfad, is it?” 
“No, it isn't far to Oxford; a train will take you there 
u non, it iznt fa: tu oksfad; a trein wil teik ju: dea 
a straight line 
a line with bends 
in an hour and a half, and yet by boat the trip takes 
in an auar and a ha:f, and jet bai bout da trip teiks 
two days. The train goes in an almost straight line, 
tu: deis. da trein gouz in an o:lmoust streit lain, 
while the river makes many bends, as most rivers do. 
hwail da riva meiks meni bends, as moust rivas du:. 
284 
Although London is connected with Oxford by the river, 
o:fdou l\ndan iz ka'nektid wid oksfad bed da riva, 
The Thirty-Second (32nd) Chapter. 
yet it is mostly tourists who make the trip to Oxford 
jet it is moustli tuarists hu: meik da trip tu oksfad 
mostly = most 
often 
by boat. The steamer goes so slowly that they have 
bat bout. do sti:mo gouz sou slouli dot dei hcev 
time to see everything, and at night the boat stops at 
taim ta si: evripiy, and at nait da bout stops at 
a town, and the tourists go ashore to sleep at a hotel.” 
a taun, and da tuarists gou a'fo: ta sli:p at a hou'tel” 
The first thing they noticed when the boat had started, 
da fa:st pirf dei noutist hwen da bout had sta:tid, 
A 
was a big palace on the right bank of the river. “What 
was a big pcelis on da rait bcerjk av da riva. C( hwot 
king 
palace is that?” asked Storm. “Does the King or 
pcelis is dcetf” a:skt sto:m. “d\s da kiy o: 
some other person of the royal family live there?” “No, 
s\m Ada pa:sn av da roial fcemili lir deaf 9 ’ i( nou, 
the royal family = 
the king’s family 
it is not used by the royal family. It is called Lambeth 
it is not ju:sd bai da roial fcemili. it is ko:ld Ice mb a p 
Palace.” 
pcelis 
A little farther up the river, just after a bend, they 
a litl fcr.dar Ap da riva, d^ASt a:ftar a bend, dei 
passed under Putney Bridge, and Mr. Miller told them 
pa:st a nda pAtni brid$, and rnista mila tould dam 
about the great boatrace which takes place every year 
a'baut da greit boutreis hwitf teiks pleis evri jia 
boatrrn 
between students from the universities of Oxford and 
bftwi:n stju.dants from da juniva:sitiz av oksfad and 
285 
Chapter Thirty-Two (32). 
Saxons = the 
name of some of 
the people who 
lived in England a 
thousand years ago 
Cambridge. The boats start at Putney Bridge and go 
keimbrid's. da bouts sta:t dt pAtni brid 3 and gou 
as far as Mortlake, which is about AV 2 miles 
az fair dz meitleik, hwitf iz e'baut fair and a half mailz 
farther up the river. The men in each boat do all they 
faidar a p da riva. da men in i:tj bout du: ail dei 
can to make their boat get there first. The young men 
keen ta meik dea bout get dea faist. da jAy men 
were very surprised to hear that the boatrace takes 
we: veri sa'praizd ta hia dat da boutreis teiks 
only about twenty minutes. 
ounli e'baut tzventi minits. 
Some time later they came to Kingston-on-Thames. 
SAm taint leita dei keim ta kiystan an temz. 
“It is a very old town, and as the name tells us, it has 
“it iz a veri ould taun, and az da neim telz as, it hcez 
something to do with kings; it means the king’s town. 
sAmply ta dm wid kiyz; it miinz da kiyz taun. 
About twelve hundred years ago, the old Saxon kings 
e'baut tweh' JiAndred jiez a'gou, di ould sceksn kiyz 
were crowned here,” Mr. Miller said to the young men. 
zva: kraund hia,” mist a mile sed ta da )Ay men. 
“Do you know where the English kings are crowned 
“dm jm non hwea di iyglif kiyz a: kraund 
nowadays?” he asked. “Oh, yes, we know that all 
nauedciz?” hi: a:skt. u ou, jes, zvi: nou deet oil 
right,” they all replied; “it is at Westminster Abbey. 
raitdei a:l ri'plaid; “it iz at Westminster cebi. 
286 
The Thirty-Second ‘(32nd) Chapter. 
The last time an English king was crowned there, we 
da la:st taim an iyglif kiy waz kraund dea , wi: 
read all about it in the newspapers, and from the many 
red a:l a'baut it in dd nju:speipdz , and fram da meni 
pictures that were taken we were able to see how it 
piktfaz dat wa: teikn wi: wa:r eibl ta si: hciu it 
was done. It was very interesting to see all the people 
was dAn. it waz veri intristiy ta si: a:l da pi:pi 
in their fine silk clothes, some of them with crowns 
in dea fain silk kloudz , saw, av dam wid kraunz 
upon their heads. One would think that they were 
a'pan dea hedz. WAn wud piyk dat dei wa: 
pictures from very old times, and not pictures of 
piktfaz fram veri ould taimz, and not piktjaz av 
something taking place in modern times.” 
s Amply teikiy pleis in mad an taimz” 
They had now got past Kingston. On their way up the 
dei had nau gat pa:st kiy star. an dea wei Ap da 
river they passed many small boats from which people 
riva dei pa:st meni sma:l bouts fram hiuitf pi:pl 
were fishing in the river, and on the banks of the river 
wa: fijiy in da riva, and an da bceyks av da riva 
they also saw many people fishing. Every time the 
dei a:lsou sa: meni pi: pi fifiy. evri taim da 
steamer passed one of the boats, the man in the boat 
sti:ma pa:st WAn av da bouts, da mcen in da bout 
looked up and shouted angry words at them. 
lukt Ap and fautid ceygri wa:dz cet dam. 
crown 
287 
Chapter Thirty-Two (32). 
one fish 
many fish 
two fish, or two 
fishes 
He catches, he 
caught, he has 
caught [kcetjis, 
kj:t, ko:t]. 
“Why are they so angry?” Wood asked. “I can see 
“hwai a: dei sou ceygri?” wud a:skt. “ai kon si: 
that you have never been fishing,” Brown said to him. 
ddt ju: hdv nevd bi:n fifty,” braun sed td him. 
“When a boat like this passes, all the fish go away, 
“hwen 3 bout laik dis pciisiz, o:l da fif gou a'wei, 
and then the men in the boats do not catch any fish. 
and den da men in da bouts du: not kcetf eni fif. 
— Do they catch many fish here?” he asked Mr. Miller. 
— du: dei kcetf meni fif hia?” hi: a:skt mist a mila. 
“No, I don’t think so; there are fish enough in the river, 
u nou, ai dount piyk sou; dear a: fif inAf in da riva, 
but there are too many boats passing up and down 
b\t dear a: tu: meni bouts pa:siy Ap and daun 
the river all the time. But I don’t understand why 
da riva o:l da taim. bAt ai dount Anda'stcend hwai 
they get so angry; they must know that there are 
dei get sou ceygri; dei mAst nou dat dear a: 
steamers going up and down the river all day, so that 
sti:maz gouiy Ap and daun da riva o:l dei . sou dat 
there is nothing to be so angry about. They had better 
dear iz nApiy ta hi: sou ceygri a'baut. dei had beta 
go to a quieter place to fish. I once did some fishing 
gou tu a kwaiata pleis ta fif. ai WAns did sAm fifiy 
here with a friend. We spent a whole day on the river, 
hia wid a frond, wi: spent a houl dei on da riva, 
and at the end of the day I had caught only one small 
and at di end av da dei ai had ko:t ounli WAn smo.l 
288 
The Thirty-Second {32nd) Chapter. 
fish, three inches long!” 
fij, pri: inf is lay!” 
They arrived at Hampton Court after a short time 
dei a'raivd at hcemtan ka:t a:ftdr a fa:t tairn 
and went up to look at the palace. It is situated very 
and went a p ta luk at da pcelis. it is sitjueitid veri 
beautifully in some gardens. They stood for a long 
bju:tafuli in s\m ga.dns. dei stud far a lay 
time looking at the lovely flowers, and especially at 
taim lukiy at da l\vli flauas, and is'pefali at 
a long straight walk with many beautiful flowers on 
a lay streit wa:k wid meni bju:taful flauas an 
both sides. In some parts of the palace people may 
boup saids. in sam pa:ts av ■ da pcelis pi:pi mei 
go in and look at the rooms and all that is in them. 
gou in and luk at da ru:ms and a:l dat is in dam. 
Everything is left just as it was hundreds of years ago. 
evripiy is left d$ASt as it was hAndrads av jias a 1 gou. 
Most of the things in the palace are connected with 
moust av da piys in da pcelis a: ka'nektid wid 
the Tudor and Stuart kings and queens, especially with 
da tju.’dar and stjuat kiys and kwi:ns, is'pefali zvid 
Queen Anne, the great Stuart queen of England. One 
kwi:n cen, da greit stjuat kwi:n av iygland. zvau 
of the things which interested them very much was 
av da piys hwitf intristid dam veri mAtf was 
Queen Anne’s bedroom. “You can see,” Wood said 
kwi:n cens bedrum. “ju: kan si:, 33 zvud sed 
£££}=•>«<*- 
mily names of 
several English 
kings and queens 
289 
Chapter Thirty-Two (32). 
bus 
to the others, “that women were the same then as 
ta di Adaz, “dat wimin zva: da seim den dz 
now,” and he showed them all the things that the 
nan” dnd hi: foud darn a:l da pirjz dat da 
Queen had used to make herself beautiful. 
kzvi:n had ju:zd ta meik ha:'self bju:taful. 
When it was time to go home, Mr. Miller proposed 
liwen it waz taim ta gou houm, mista mila pra'pouzd 
taking a bus straight back to London, as far as 
teikirj a 1)as streit bcek ta l\ndan , az fa:r az 
Wimbledon; From Wimbledon they could go by tram 
wimbldan. frain wimbldan dei kud gou bat trcem 
to Westminster Bridge. “If we go that way,” he said, 
ta westrninsta brid 3 . “if wi: gou dcet zvei,” hi: sed , 
“we shall be able to see much of South London from 
“zvi: fal bi: eibl ta si: mAtf av saup lAndan fram 
the windows.” They all thought this a good idea, and 
da zvindonz” dei o:l pa:t dis a gud ai'dia, and 
consequently they went back by bus and tram as Mr. 
konsikzvantli dei went bcek bai bAS and trcem az mista 
Miller proposed. 
mila pra'pouzd.. 
EXERCISE A. 
Mr. Miller — that they should go on a trip to Hampton 
Court —. They would go by boat from West¬ 
minster —. This bridge goes — the Thames and — 
290 
The Thirty-Second* (32nd) Chapter. 
North London with South London. The four travellers 
thought of going by — to Oxford, where the great 
English — is situated. At Oxford — there are many 
— to teach the students. Lambeth Palace is situated 
on the right — of the river. Kingston-on-Thames is 
a town where the Saxon — were — many years ago. 
Did Mr. Miller — many fish the day when he was out 
fishing? No, he only — one small fish. Who lived 
at Hampton Court — many years ago? — Anne 
lived there, and her — may still be seen in the palace. 
Did Mr. Miller — going home by boat? No, he — going 
home by —. 
EXERCISE B. 
How did the four travellers get to Hampton Court? ... 
Is it far from London to Oxford? ... Do most tourists 
go by train to Oxford? ... Where does the boatrace 
between the universities of Oxford and Cambridge start 
from? ... What is Kingston-on-Thames? ... Are the 
English kings crowned at Kingston nowadays? ... Why 
do the people fishing in the river get angry when 
steamers pass them? ... Do they catch many fish? ... 
Did Mr. Miller ever go fishing in the Thames? ... What 
did they see at Hampton Court Palace? ... 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with ‘do* or ‘does*. 
Does Mr. Smith's brother live in town? Answer ... 
Question ...? No, Mr. Smith lives in town. Does 
WORDS: 
propose 
palace 
bridge 
across 
notice 
board 
boat 
university 
straight 
line 
tourist 
bank 
bend 
royal 
boatrace 
connect 
king 
queen 
crown 
crown (verb) 
abbey 
picture 
fish (verb) 
angry 
catch 
caught 
walk 
bus 
yet 
Saxon 
professor 
student 
way 
291 
Chapter Thirty-Two (32). 
John go to school every day? Answer ... Question ...? 
No, Mr. Smith does not go to town on Sundays. Do 
you have coffee for breakfast? Answer ... Question ...? 
Yes, I often have soup and meat for dinner. Does Helen 
swim as well as her brother? Answer ... Question ...? 
No, her father sings better than she does. Does it suit 
you to pay the money now? Answer ... Question ...? 
No, English does not seem difficult to me. Do any 
of the young men collect stamps? Answer ... Question 
...? Yes, tourists often take bus trips right through 
London. Do the English like tea better than coffee? 
Answer ... Question ...? Yes, the three young men get 
shorter holidays than their teacher. Do John and Helen 
stay in the house when it is cold? Answer ... Question 
...? Yes, John and Helen come when their father 
calls them. 
292 
Chapter Thirty-Three (33). 
The Thirty-Third (33rd) Chapter. 
LONDON FROM WEST TO EAST 
Mr. Miller and his three young friends were having 
mistd mih dnd hiz pri: j\y jrendz u)d: hxviy 
breakfast at the hotel. 
brekfdst dt dd hou'tel . 
Wood: “We have now been here for several days, long 
wud: “wi hdu rum bi:n hid fd sevrdl deiz , by 
enough at least to have got an impression of London. 
in a / dt li:st id hdv got dn im'prefdn dv l\nddn. 
It seems, however, that there is no end to this big town. 
it si:mz , hauevd , dot dedr iznouend id dis big taun. 
It is very difficult to get a full impression of it.” 
it iz veri difikdlt id get d ful im'prefdn dv it .” 
Mr. Miller: “Yes, you are right. Everybody has that 
mistd mib: “jes, ju: a: rait. evribodi hxz dxt 
feeling the first time he is in London. I should like 
fidiy dd fo:st taim hi: iz in Unddn. ai fud laik 
to propose a trip which few tourists make. Let us go 
id prd'pouz d trip hwitf fju: tuorists meik . let as gou 
by Underground to the western part of London, and 
bai \ndograund td do westdn pad du lAndon , ond 
from there we will have a bus ride right through 
from ded vn: wil hxv d bAS raid rait pm: 
London from w r est to east. On this trip we can see 
lAnddn frdm west tu i:st. on dis trip wi: kon si: 
feeling = that 
which one feels 
western = which 
is to the west 
right (here) = 
straight 
9/1 
293 
Chapter Thirty-Three (33). 
suburbs = the 
parts of a town 
that are farthest 
away from the 
central part 
the western and the eastern suburbs of London/’ “I 
do westdn ond di i:stdn SAbo:bz ov lAndon” “ai 
think that is a very good idea,” said .Wood, and the 
piyk dset iz o veri gud aidio ,” sed wud grid di 
others agreed with him. 
a 5dZ ogri:d wid him. 
As soon as they had had their breakfast, they went 
9 Z su:n dz dei hdd hoed ded brekfdst , dei went 
by Underground to Ealing, a suburb in the west of 
bai Andograund tu i:liy t 9 SAbo:b in d9 west 90 
London with a great number of small houses. Having 
lAndon wid 9 greit nAmbor 9 V smo:l hauziz. hsevig 
arrived at Ealing, they got on a bus going to Barking 
9'raivd 9t i:lig y dei got on 9 b\s gouiy t9 ba:kiy 
in East London. After they had passed through the 
in i:st lAndon. a:ft 9 dei h 9 d pa:st pru: d 9 
western suburbs of London and got an impression of 
west9n SAbo:bz 90 lAndon 9nd got on im'prefon ov 
them, Brown said to the teacher, “Each suburb seems 
dom , braun sed to do ti:tfo, “i:tf s\bo:b si:mz 
to be much like a town, with a High Street or a High 
to bi: mAtf laik 9 taun , wid 9 hai stri:t o:r 9 hai 
Road where the biggest and best shops, the theatres, 
roud hweo do bigist ond best fops , do piotoz , 
and the cinemas are to be found.” 
ond do sinimoz a: to bi: faund” 
Storm: “I have noticed that some of the shops in the 
sto:m: “ai hov noutist dot SAm ov do fops in do 
294 
The Thirty-Third (33rd) Chapter: 
suburbs are just as big as those we have seen in the 
s\bd:bz a: d$Ast oz big oz douz wi: hdv si:n in do 
West End, and some of the cinemas are even bigger.” 
west end , dnd s\m ov dd sinimdz a:r i:von bigd." 
Wood: ‘'What long rows of small houses they have in 
wud: t( hwot log rouz dv smo:l hauziz dei heev in 
the suburbs!” Mr. Miller: “Yes, that is what the Lon- 
dd s\bd:bzr mistd mild: “ jes , diet iz hwot dd l\n- 
doners like. Instead of living in flats in big buildings 
ddndz laik. insted du liviy in fliets in big bildiyz 
in the centre of the town, they prefer to live in their 
in dd sentdr ov dd taun , dei pri'fo: id liv in dedr 
own houses in the suburbs. That’s why you see those 
oun hauziz in dd SAbo:bz. diets hwai ju: si: douz 
long rows of small houses, street upon street of them/' 
toy rouz ov smo:l hauziz , stri:t opon stri:t ov dom” 
Wood: “I do not wonder that the Londoners like small 
wud: lt aidu: not wxndo dot do txndonoz laik smo:l 
houses. I should also prefer a small house of my own 
hauziz. ai f ud o:lsou pri'fo:r o smo:l haus ov mai oun 
to a flat in a big building. Besides, they have their 
tu o flwt in o big bildiy. bi'saidz , dei hiev deor 
own gardens with trees and flowers.” 
oun ga:dnz wid tri:z ond flauoz” 
Now they began to get near*the centre of London; the 
nau dei bi'givn to gel nio do senior ov l\ndon; do 
bus went along Oxford Street, and before long they 
bAS went oloy oksfod stri:t f ond bi'jo: loy dei 
centre = central 
part 
street upon street 
= one street after 
another 
to prefer... to = 
to like ... better 
than 
9/2 
295 
Chapter Thirty-Three (33). 
were in the City. Mr. Miller: “Now we are in the 
wo:r in do siti. mistd mih: i( nau. wi: a:r in dd 
the middle = the 
centre 
middle of London.” Brown: “Then we have only 
midi 9V lAndon.” braun: “den wi: hdv ounli 
travelled half-way from west to east. It gives us a good 
traevld ha:fwei jrgm west tu i:st. it givz as d gud 
impression of how large London is.” 
im'prefdn dv hau la:d$ lAndon iz” 
Mr. Miller: “Yes, but look at the streets now. They are 
mistd mih: “ jes , b\t luk jt dd stri:ts nau . dei a: 
much narrower than in the suburbs. We are in the old 
mAtf nuerouo ddn in dd SAbd:bz. wi: a:r in di ould 
part of London. That building over there is the Bank 
pa:t dv lAnddn. duel bildiy ouvd ded iz dd baegk 
of England. It is the greatest bank in the country; a 
du iyghnd. it iz dd greitist beeyk in dd kAntri; d 
lot of money passes through it every year, but I think 
lot dv mAni pa:siz pm: it evri jid , bAt ai piyk 
you have already heard of the Bank of England many 
ju: hdv o:l'redi hd:d dv dd bueyk dv iyghnd meni 
times at home.” 
taimz dt houm” 
motor-car = car 
bicycle 
Storm: “What a lot of traffic there is here! There are 
slo:m: (i hwot d lot ov traefik deor iz hid! dedr a: 
large numbers of people, motor-cars, and buses, but I 
/a:dj nAmbdZ du pi:pl f moutoka:z , dnd bAsiz , bAt ai 
see very lew bicycles.” 
si: veri fju: baisiklz 
29G 
The Thirty-Third (33rd) Chapter. 
Wood: “Yes, the bus can hardly get through the traffic, 
wud: “jes , do b\s kdn ha:dli get pru: dg traefik , 
and it must be very difficult to ride a bicycle in all 
grid it m\st bi: veri difikalt tg raid g baisikl in o:l 
this traffic.” 
6 is traefik" 
Mr. Miller: “It is hardly ever possible to get through 
mistg milg: “it iz ha:dli evg posgbl tg get pru: 
the traffic here quickly. The Bank is one of the two 
dg traefik hig kwikli . dg baeyk iz w\n gv dg tu: 
places in London at which the traffic is greatest. All 
pleisiz in l\ndgn gt hwitf dg traefik iz greitist. o:l 
the buildings in the City are office buildings, and 
dd bildiyz in dg siti a:r ofis bildiyz, gnd 
hardly any one lives here, so that this part of the town 
ha:dli eni w\n livz hig , soil dgt dis pa:t gv dd taun 
is almost empty at night. In the evening, all who work 
izodmoust emti dt nait" in di i:vniy, o:l hu: wd:k 
in the City want to go home almost at the same time. 
in dd siti wont tg gou houm o:lmoust gt dd seim taim. 
Consequently, the streets are just full of people at 
konsikwantli , dd stri:ts a: dj\st ful of pi:pl dt 
that time.” 
daet taim." 
Brown: “I have noticed that there are no trams to be 
braun: “ai hdv noutist ddt degr a: nou traemz id bi: 
seen in the City.” 
si:n in dd siti" 
hardly = almost 
not 
the Bank = the 
Bank of England 
297 
Chapter Thirty-Three (33). 
neither in the City 
nor in the West 
End = not in the 
City and not in the 
West End 
no trams at all = 
not a single tram 
the very houses = 
even the houses 
Mr. Miller: "No, they are used neither in the City 
mistd mih: “nou, dei a: ju:zd naiddr in dd siti 
nor in the West End, and you can see for yourselves 
no.:r in do west end, ond ju: kdn si: fd jo:'selvz 
that in these narrow streets it would hardly be possible 
ddt in di:z naerou stri:ts it wud ha:dli bi: posdbl 
to have any trams at all. In four or five years, I 
td hiev eni triemz dt o:l. in fo:r o: faiv jhz, ai 
think, there will be no trams at all in London. They 
piyk, deo wit bi: nou triemz dt o:l in l\nddn. dei 
are neither very fast nor easy to drive. Instead, they 
a: naidd veri fa:st no:r i:zi td draiv. in'sted, dei 
will have either more buses or more Underground rail- 
wil huev aidd mo: b\siz o: mo:r \ndograund reil - 
ways. That is just the same as in Paris. ,, 
weiz. diet izd^Ast do seim oz in pieris” 
After leaving the City, they passed through the East 
a:fto li:vi?j do siti, dei pa:st pru: di i:st 
End, and Mr. Miller said, "Many poor people live in 
end, ond misto mild sed, “meni puo pi:pl liv in 
this part of the town. You can see from the very 
dis pa:t ov do taun. ju: kon si: from do veri 
houses that the people living in them must be poor, 
hauziz dot do pi:pl liviy in ddm m\st bi: puo, 
that is, they have very little money. ,, 
diet iz, dei hiev veri litl m\ni” 
Some time later, after passing through many other 
s\m taim leih, a:fh pa:sir) pru: meni a dd 
298 
The Thirty-Third (33rd) Chapter. 
parts of London, they arrived at Barking, a suburb in 
pa:ts ao /a ndan, dci a raiod at ba:kir), a s\ba:b in 
the east of London. They found that the suburbs of 
di i:sl 9V l\nddn. dci faund dal da s\ba:bz ao 
East London were just like those of West London; 
i:st l\ndan wa: d$\st laik douz ao west l\ndan; 
consequently, after a short time, they returned by 
to return = to go 
kansikioanlli , a:ftar a fo:t taim , dci ri'ta:nd bai 
back 
Underground to their hotel. 
a ndagraund ta dea hou'tcl. 
EXERCISE A. 
The three young men have got a good — of how large 
WORDS: 
London is. However, they have the — that they do 
impression 
not know the city yet. Mr. Miller — a trip from west 
western 
to — right — London. They went by — to one of the 
west 
— in the west of London. In each — there is a — 
eastern 
Street or High — where most of the big shops and the 
east 
— are to be —. 
ride 
The Londoner does not like to live in a —. He — his 
right 
own house. There are long — of such houses in the — 
suburb 
of London. In the City the streets are much — than in 
High Street 
the suburbs, and there is a lot of — in the streets. 
row 
There are many — to be seen in the streets of the City, 
flat 
but not many —. It is very difficult to — a bicycle 
prefer 
in all that —. It is — possible to get through the — 
centre 
quickly. There are no — in the narrow streets of the 
middle 
City, and in a few years there will be no trams- 
bank 
in London. 
traffic 
9/3 
299 
Chapter Thirty-Three (33). 
motor-car 
bicycle 
hardly 
any one 
neither . . . nor 
either ... or 
no ... at all 
poor 
return 
feeling 
very 
half-way 
EXERCISE B. 
Where did Mr. Miller and the three young men have 
their breakfast on the morning of the day when they 
went right through London by bus? . . . How did they 
start their trip? . . . What did they find that each 
suburb looked like? . . . What was there to be found in 
each suburb? . . . Why does the Londoner not like to 
live in a flat? . . . What are the streets like in the centre 
of London? ... Is it easy to ride on a bicycle in the 
streets of the City? . . . What people live in the East 
End of London? . . . Were the suburbs of East London 
different from those of West London? . . . V/hat did the 
four travellers do when they arrived at Barking? .. . 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with did’. 
Did Brown go alone to the railway station when he 
left his home to travel to England? Answer . . . 
Question . . .? Yes, Wood’s sister went along with him 
to the station. Did the driver drive fast enough when 
going to the station? Answer . . . Question . . .? Yes, 
the others waited for him at the station. Did you think 
that there would be so much traffic in London that 
the buses could hardly get through? Answer . . . 
Question . . .? Yes, they noticed that the streets got 
narrower when they came back to the centre of Lon¬ 
don. Did they stop at any of the second-hand book¬ 
shops? Answer . .. Question . . .? No, they turned to the 
right when they came to Shaftesbury Avenue. Did 
the young men pay for their tickets themselves? 
300 
The Thirty-Third (33rd) Chapter. 
Answer . . . Question . . .? No, they did not buy any¬ 
thing in Bond Street. Did the four travellers visit any 
palaces on their trip up the river? Answer . . . Question 
. . .? Yes, they saw Lambeth Palace from the boat. 
Did they find the old town of Kingston very interesting? 
Answer . . . Question . . .? Yes, they saw many people 
fishing on the banks of the river. 
301 
Chapter Thirty-Four (34). 
The Thirty-Fourth (34th) Chapter. 
park 
THE PARKS OF LONDON 
At lunch the next day, they discussed the buildings 
ot l\nf bo nekst dei , bei dis'k\st bd bildiyz 
they had seen in London. “We have now got an im- 
bei hdd si:n in Ixndon. “wi: hdv nail got on im¬ 
pression of the buildings of London, but we should also 
'prefon ov bo bildiyz ou l\ndon , b\t wi: fud o:lsou 
like to see its many fine and big parks,” said Wood. 
laik to si: its meni fain ond big pa:ks” sed wild. 
“We have often read about them in the newspapers. 
“wi: hov o:fn red o'baut bom in bo njwspeipoz , 
and sometimes we have seen pictures of them, too; 
ond s\mtaimz wi: hov si:n piktjoz ov bom , tu:; 
but a picture does not give a real impression of them, 1 
b\t o piktfo d\z not giv o riot im'prefon ov bom , ai 
think. One must see them in reality to get the right 
piyk. w\n m\st si: bom in ri'xliti to get bo rait 
impression.” “Yes,” answered Mr. Miller, “that would 
im'prefon. 11 “jes 11 a:nsod misto milo, “baet wild 
be a good idea for to-day’s trip. But you speak of the 
bi: o gud ai'dio fo todeiz trip. b\t ju: spi:k ov bo 
parks of London as if you could see them all in a day. 
pa:ks ov l\ndon oz if fu: kud si: bom o:l in o dei. 
You really can’t see more than one, or two at the most, 
ju: rioli ka:nt si: mo: bon w\n , o: tu: ot bo moust 9 
302 
The Thirty-Fourth (34th) Chapter. 
in one day. I propose that we go to Regent’s Park first. 
in w\n dei. ai propouz ddt wi: gou id ri:dpnts pa:k fd:st. 
From there we can go through Baker Street and Ox- 
frdm ded wi: kdn gou pru: beikd stri:t ond oks- 
ford Street to Hyde Park, and while we are on our 
fdd stri:t to haid pa:k 9 ond hwail wi: a:r on am 
way, we might stop and have some tea somewhere in 
wei , wi: mail stop ond hwv s\m ti: SAmhweor in 
Oxford Street.” 
oksfod stri:t .” 
They did as Mr. Miller proposed and took a bus to 
dei did oz misto milo propouzd ond tuk o b\s to 
Regent’s Park. In this park are the well-known Zoo- 
ri:dpnts pa:k. in dis pa:k a: do welnoun zu- 
logical Gardens of London. They went in to look at 
'lodjikol ga:dnz ov l\ndon. dei went in to luk ot 
the animals. Mr. Miller told the young men that Lon- 
di amimolz. misto milo tould do ]Ag men dot l\n- 
doners call the Zoological Gardens the ‘Zoo’, for short. 
donoz ko:l do zu'lodjikol ga:dnz do *zu:\ jo fo:t. 
They stood for a long time watching the monkeys play- 
dei stud for o log taim wotfig do m\gkiz plei - 
ing with each other. “They are so funny,” said Brown, 
ig wid i:tf a do. “dei a: sou f\ni sed braun, 
“that I could watch them for hours.” Suddenly, one of 
“dot ai kud wotf dom for auoz .” sxdnli , wau ov 
the monkeys put out his hand and took an umbrella 
do mAgkiz put aut hiz tuend ond tuk on a m'brelo 
somewhere = at 
some place or 
other 
for short = to 
make it shorter 
monkey 
suddenly = 
quickly and 
surprisingly 
Chapter Thirty-Four (34). 
near by = near 
from a little girl who was standing near by. The 
from o litl god hu: woz staendig nio bai. di 
umbrella was not open, but a few minutes later, the 
a m'brelo Wdz not oupon , b\t o fju: minits leito , do 
monkey had got it opened. It was so funny to see the 
m\gki hod got it oupond. it woz sou f\ni to si: do 
monkey running about with the umbrella that all the 
mxgki r\nig obaut wid di a m'brelo dot o:l do 
make 
as = when 
people who watched it had to laugh, except the little 
pi: pi hu: wot ft it hsed to la:f , ik'sept do litl 
girl. 
go:l 
They also went to see the snakes, which interested 
dei o:lsou went to si: do sneiks , hwitf intristid 
Wood very much, and after having seen the other 
wud veri m\tf 9 ond a:fto hveuig si:n di Ador 
animals, they left Regent’s Park and went to a restau- 
senimolz , dei left ri:dpnts pa:k ond went tu o resto- 
rant in Oxford Street for tea. “What a big place this 
ront in oksfod stri:t fo ti:. i( hwot o big pleis dis 
is!” the young men said as they entered the restau- 
izr do jAy men sed oz dei entod do resto- 
rant. “It is the largest we have ever seen. What is the 
ro:r). “it iz do la:d$ist wi: hov evo si:n. hwot iz do 
name of it?” “The Marble Arch Corner House,” Mr. 
neim ov it?” “do ma:bl a:tf ko:no haus” misto 
Miller answered. “Yes, it is a long name,” he said, 
milor a:nsod . “jes f it iz o log neim” hi: sed , 
304 
The Thirty-Fourth (34th) Chapter. 
laughing at the look of surprise on the young men’s 
la:fiy ot do luk ov sopraiz on do ]Ay menz 
faces. “I’ll explain it to you, while we are having our 
jeisiz . “ail iks'plein it to ju : 9 hwail wi: a: haeviy auo 
tea.” 
ti :. 99 
When the tea had been served, he explained, “This is 
hwen do ti: hod bi:n so:vd , hi: iks'pleind , “dis iz 
one of the many restaurants and tea-rooms which the 
w\n ov do meni restoro:yz ond ti:rumz hwitf do 
big firm of ‘Lyons’ has all over England. In London 
big fo:m ov ‘ laionz ’ haez o:l ouvor iyglond. in lAndon 
alone there are hundreds of them, and each one is 
o'loun deor a: hAndrodz ov dom 9 ond i:tf war iz 
called a ‘Lyons’. The very first big one was in a corner 
ko:ld o ( laionz\ do veri fo:st big war woz in o ko:no 
house, that is, a house built where two streets cross 
haus, daet iz 9 o haus bilt hweo tu: struts kros 
to cross = to go 
across 
each other. The restaurant was therefore called a 
i:tf Ado. do restoro:y woz deofo: ko:ld o 
Corner House, and now the four or five biggest ‘Lyons’ 
ko:no haus 9 ond nau do fo:r o: faiv bigist ' laionz ’ 
restaurants are called Comer houses, even if they are 
restoro'.yz a: ko:ld ko:no hauziz , i:von if dei a: 
not situated at corners. You will be surprised, perhaps, 
not sitjueitid ot ko.noz. ju: wil bi: sopraizd 9 po'haeps , 
corner 
to hear that one or two of the Corner Houses never 
to hio dot war o: tu: ov do ko:no hauziz nevo 
305 
Chapter Thirty-Four (34). 
to move = to take 
from one place to 
another 
nobody = no one 
close, but have rooms that are open day and night. 
klouz, b\t h 9 V ru:mz fat a:r oupgri dei md nait. 
Now you know what a ‘Comer House' is. This one 
nau ju: nou hwot 9 ‘ko:n 9 haus ’ iz. dis war 
is called the Marble Arch Corner House, because it is 
iz ko:ld 69 ma:bl a:tj kd:m haus , bi'koz it iz 
only one or two minutes from Marble Arch, a big 
ounli war 0: tu: minits \r9rn ma:bl a:tf, 9 big 
arch built of marble, situated j.ust outside the entrance 
a:tf bilt 9V ma:bl, sitjueitid dpst 'aut'said di enlr9ns 
to Hyde Park. Marble is a very expensive and beauti- 
t9 haid pa:k. ma:bl iz 9 veri iks'pensiv anrf bju:t9- 
ful stone, which is often shining and white. Marble 
ful 5 /own, hwitf iz o:fn fainiy 9nd hwait . ma:bl 
Arch was built for King George IV as an entrance 
a:tf u)9Z bilt f 9 kiy dp:d$ 69 fo:p 9Z on enir9ns 
to Buckingham Palace, but after it had been built, 
t9 bAkiyom ptelis, bAt a:\t 9 r it h9d bi:n bilt , 
they found that it was too narrow for the King’s 
dei faund d9t it u)9Z tu: merou \9 d9 kiyz 
carriage to pass through it. In 1851 it was moved 
kxrid$ t9 pa:s pru: it. in eiti:n fifti'wAn it W9Z mu:vd 
from Buckingham Palace to this corner of Hyde Park. It 
from bAkiyom peelis t9 dis ko:n9r 9V haid pa:k. it 
cost £ 80,000 to build. Now it just stands there, 
kosl eili pauz 9 nd paundz t 9 bild. nau it dpst stzendz de 9 > 
and nobody uses it; it is even closed, so that you can’t 
9nd noubodi ju:ziz it; it iz i:v9n klouzd , sou d9t ju: ka:nt 
306 
The Thirty-Fourth (34th) Chapter. 
get through it, but have to go round it. But the Lon- 
cjct pru: it, b\t hsev td gou raund it, b\t do l\n- 
doners like it, and tourists go to see it. There is always 
ddtidz laik it, dnd tudrists gou td si: it . dedr iz o:lwoz 
much traffic round Marble Arch, and at night when 
/n a// trxfik raund ma:bl a:tj, dnd dt nait hwen 
the lights are on, it is beautiful to look at. There are 
dd laits a:r on, it iz bju:tdful td luk set, dedr a: 
always people standing round it, selling different 
o:lu)dZ pi:pl stsendig raund it, selig difrdnt 
things: newspapers, fruit, chocolate, etc. It has really 
pigz: nju:speipoz, fru:t, tfokdlit, itsetro, it hdz ridli 
become part of London, a part which the Londoners 
bi'k\m pa:t dv l\ndon, d pa:t hwitf dd Ixndonoz 
like very much. But if you have finished your tea, 
laik veri m\tj. b\t if ju: hdv finift jo: ti:, 
we might walk round it before entering the Park, so 
wi: mait wo:k raund it bi'fo:r entoriy do pa:k, sou 
that you may see it from all sides. I will pay the bill 
dot ju: mei si: it from o:l saidz. ai wit pei do bit 
while you finish your bread and butter, Wood. You 
hwail ju: finif jo: bred ond bxto, wud. ju: 
seem to eat a lot,” the teacher said, laughing, “be- 
si:m tu i:t o lot,” do ti:tfo sed, la:fig, “bi - 
cause you are always the last of us to finish.” 
koz ju: a:r o:lwoz do la:st ov as to finif ” 
They crossed Oxford Street and entered the Park, and 
dei krost oksfod stri:t ond entod do pa:k, ond 
the lights are on 
= the lights are 
shining 
307 
Chapter Thirty-Four (34). 
just inside they found a lot of people standing round 
d$Ast 'irisaid dei faund a lot 9V pi:pl staendiy raund 
a speaker who had got up on a soap-box to speak. 
9 spi:k9 hu: h9d gat a p on 9 soupboks ta spi:k. 
They listened to him and tried to understand what he 
dei lisnd ta him and . traid tu a nda'staend hwot hi: 
was saying, but could hear very little. “This is a thing 
waz seiiy , b\t kud hia veri litl. “dis iz a pig 
which you will find in many places in England,” said 
hwitf ju: wil faind in meni pleisiz in iyglandsed 
Mr. Miller. “If a man wants to speak about something, 
mista mila. “if a maen wonts ta spi:k a'baut SAmpiy , 
he can bring a box to stand on and say what he likes. 
hi: kan briy a boks ta staend on and sei hwot hi: laiks. 
Nobody will stop him, and there will always be some 
noubodi wil stop him , and dea wil o:lwaz bi: SAm 
one out walking who stops on his way to listen to his 
WAn aut wo:kiy hu: stops on hiz wei ta lisn ta hiz 
talk or laugh at him.” 
to:k 0 : la:f at him.” 
On their way through the Park they came to the 
on dea wei pru: da pa:k dei keim ta da 
Serpentine, a long lake which looks like a snake or a 
sa:pantain , a lay leik hwitf Inks laik a sneik o:r a 
serpent = snake 
serpent, and in which people may bathe. “In the 
sa:pant , and in hwitf pi'pl rnei beid . “in di 
evenings in summer,” Mr. Miller told them, “there 
i.vniyz in SAma,” mista mila tould dam , “dear 
308 
The Thirty-Fourth (34th) Chapter. 
are bands or orchestras playing in the Park, and there 
a: btendz o:r o:kistrdZ pleiiy in bo pa:k 9 dnd beor 
are always many people who come to listen to them. 
a:r o:\wdz meni pi:pl hu: k\m Id lisn id bdm. 
But we cannot stop to-night; perhaps we can come 
b\t wi: kxnot stop td'nait; po'hxps wi: kdn k\m 
this way some other evening and hear one of the bands 
bis wei sxm AbdT i:vni?j dnd hid wxn dv bd bxndz 
play. Look!” he said suddenly and stopped them. “Now 
plei. lukr hi: sed sxdnli ond stopt bdm. (t nau 
I will show you something funny, which I think will 
ai wil Jou ju: sxmpiy fxni , hwitf ai pigk wit 
surprise you.” They looked and saw — a flock of 
sopraiz ju:” bei lukl dnd so: — o flok ov 
sheep! “Is this really a flock of sheep in the centre 
fi:p! “iz bis rioli o flok ov fi:p in bo senior 
of London?” they shouted in surprise. “Yes, sheep,” 
ov Ixndon?” bei fautid in sopraiz. il jes 9 fi:p” 
their teacher replied, “real sheep! They move about 
bed ti-'tfo riplaid , “riol Ji:p! bei mu:v obaut 
the Park to eat the grass, so that it does not get too 
bo pa:k tu i:t bo gra:s 9 sou bot it dxz not get tu: 
long.” 
log” 
They finished their walk through the Park at Hyde 
bei jinift bed wo:k pm: bo pa:k ot haid 
Park Corner, and Mr. Miller told them that it is the 
pa:k ko:no 9 ond misto milo tould bom bot it iz bo 
orchestra 
309 
Chapter Thirty-Four (34). 
place which has the most traffic in the whole world. 
pleis hwitj hxz do moust trsefik in do houl wo:ld. 
It was not difficult for them to understand this, be- 
it wdz not difikolt fo dom lu a ndostxnd Sis , bi¬ 
cause it was several minutes before they were able to 
'koz it woz sevrol minits bi'fo: dei wo:r eibl to 
cross to the other side of the street. 
kros to di \do said ov do stri:t. 
WORDS: 
park 
real 
reality 
really 
Zoological 
Gardens 
Zoo 
monkey 
funny 
suddenly 
umbrella 
open 
open (verb) 
as 
corner 
marble 
arch 
entrance 
round 
speaker 
EXERCISE A. 
Mr. Miller proposed that their next trip should be to 
some of the great — of London. They had often seen 
pictures of them at home, but they wanted to see them 
in — to get a — impression of them. In Regent’s Park 
are the — Gardens of London, which the Londoners 
call the —. In the Zoo they — a — playing with an 
— which it had taken from a little girl standing 
near by. All the people watching it had to —, except 
the girl. She did not think it —. The big * Lyons’ 
restaurants are called — Houses, even if they are not 
situated at —. Marble Arch was first built as an — 
to Buckingham Palace, but as it was too narrow for 
the King’s —, they — it to this corner of Hyde Park. 
It is not used as an entrance here, but there is much 
traffic — it. Mr. Miller thought that Wood ate a —, 
because he was always the last of them to —. In Hyde 
Park they saw a — standing on a soap-box. There 
were many people there listening to what he was —. 
In the Park there is a long lake called the —, because 
it looks like a snake or —. While they were walking 
310 
The Thirty-Fourth (34th) Chapter. 
in the Park, Mr. Miller — stopped them and showed 
them a — of sheep. 
EXERCISE B. 
What did they decide to see the day after they had 
been out to see the buildings of London? . . . Where 
had they got their first impression of the parks of 
London? . . . What is the Zoo? . . . Why did the people 
who were watching the monkeys laugh? . . . Why was 
the restaurant called a Corner House? . . . Where was 
Marble Arch first built? . . . Why was it moved? . . . 
Why were people standing round the man on the soap¬ 
box in Hyde Park? . . . Why is the lake in Hyde Park 
called the Serpentine? . . . What can you hear on sum¬ 
mer evenings in the Park? . . . What did the young 
men see in the Park, which surprised them very 
much? . . . 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with 'has, have, 
or had’. 
Has Mr. Miller seen other countries than England? 
Answer . . . Question . . .? Yes, many things have 
changed since Mr. Miller was in England some years 
ago. Has Wood collected stamps for a long time? 
Answer . . . Question . . .? No, the young men have 
never visited England before. Have they all travelled 
by steamer before this trip? Answer . . . Question . . .? 
No, Mrs. Miller has not come along with them on the 
trip. Has Storm spent his holidays in town? Answer . . . 
Question . . .? No, they have not seen everything they 
want to see in London yet. Had they dined before 
snake 
serpent 
orchestra 
band 
play 
flock 
move 
listen 
nobody 
some one 
surprise 
for short 
somewhere 
stone 
cross (verb) 
eighty 
bathe 
look 
tea-room 
311 
Chapter Thirty-Four (34). 
they got on board the steamer? Answer . . . Question 
. . . ? Yes, every evening when they were together be¬ 
fore the trip, they had talked about the things they 
were going to see in England. Had Mr. Miller found a 
good hotel for them in London? Answer . . . Question 
...? Yes, Storm's firm had paid the whole trip for him. 
Had they planned to buy many things in London? 
Answer . . . Question .. .? No, they had not been able 
to understand the language which the porters spoke. 
Had they brought much luggage with them to Eng¬ 
land? Answer .. . Question . . .? No, they had carried 
their own bags. 
312 
Chapter Thirty-Five (35). 
The Thirty-Fifth (35th) Chapter. 
PARLIAMENT 
One morning the hotel-keeper came in to have a 
w\n mo:niy ba hou'telki:pd keim in ta hivv a 
word with our four travellers. “I hope you are enjoying 
wa:d wib ana fo: trxvlaz. “ai houp ju: a:r in'dpiuj 
yourselves in London,” he said. 
jo:'selvz in l\ndan ” hi: sed. 
Mr. Miller: "We are having a lovely time, thank 
mista mila: “wi: a: hxviy a IavU taim , pxyk 
you.” Wood: "Yes, we have enjoyed ourselves very 
wud: “jes , wi: hav in'dpid auaselvz veri 
much all the time we have been here, and we have 
m\tf o:l ba taim wi: hav bi:n hia y and wi: hav 
seen a lot of things. Now we wish to see the King 
si:n a lot av piyz . nau wi: wif ta si: ba kiy 
and the Queen, but how is that done?” 
and ba kwi:n , b\t hau iz bxt d\n?” 
Hotel-keeper: "That will be very difficult just now, 
hou'telki:pa: “bxt wil bi: veri difikalt dpst nau , 
because the King and the Queen are spending part of 
bi'koz ba kiy and ba kwi:n a: spendiy pa:t av 
the summer at Balmoral Castle in Scotland, a castle 
ba SAmar at bxl'moral ka:sl in skotland, a ka:sl 
situated in a very beautiful part of the country, where 
sitjueitid in a veri bju:taful pa:t av ba kAntri , hwea 
I am enjoying 
myself = I am 
having a good 
time. 
to wish — to want 
castle 
313 
Chapter Thirty-Five (35). 
He draws, he 
drew, he has 
drawn [ dro:z , dru:, 
dn:n ]. 
uniform 
nothing else = no 
other thing 
nearly = almost 
the King and Queen spend some of their time every 
bo kiy ond kwi:n spend s\m ov bed taim evri 
year. Many travellers who come to England wish to 
jio. mtni trwvloz hu: k\m tu iyglond wif to 
see the King and Queen. 
si: bd kiy dnd kwi:n. 
“Speaking for myself, I have never seen the present 
“ spi:kiy jd mai'self, ai hdv nevd si:n bd preznt 
King; the only time I have seen a king was when 1 
kiy; bi ounli taim ai hdv si:n d kiy wdz hwen ai 
went to see George V, who was the father of our 
went id si: dp:d$ bd fijp , hu: Wdz bd fa:bdr dV aud 
present King, George VI. The real reason why I went 
preznt kiy, dp:d$ bo siksp. bd ridl ri:zn hwai ai went 
was not so much to see the King himself as to see the 
Wdz not sou m\tf td si: bd kiy him self oz td si: bo 
horses which drew his carriage, and also the many 
ho:siz hwitf dru: hiz kwrid j, ond odsou bo meni 
men in uniforms. His carriage was drawn by eight 
men in ju:nijo:mz . hiz kivrid$ woz dro:n bai eit 
horses, and after it came a long row of men in fine 
ho:siz , ond a:ftor it kcim o toy rou ov men in fain 
uniforms. I know that people say that the English 
ju:nifo:mz . ai nou bot pi:pl sei boi bi iyglif 
are very interested in the King and Queen and speak 
a: veri intristid in bd kiy ond kwi:n ond spi:k 
of nothing else. But nearly every week when I look 
ov nspiy els. b\t nioli evri wi:k hwen ai luk 
314 
The Thirty-Fifth (35th) Chapter. 
at the pictures in foreign papers, I notice that people 
dt dd piktfdz in forin peipdz , ai noutis ddt pi:pi 
everywhere go to see the different kings and queens, 
evrihwed gou Id si: dd difrdnt kigz dnd kwi:nz , 
everywhere = at 
all places 
and if a country has no king, then I see pictures of 
dnd if d k\ntri haez nou kig , den ai si: piktfaz dv 
people that go to see the president. So I think that 
pi:pl ddt gou id si: dd preziddnt. sou ai pigk ddt 
people in other countries are just as interested in these 
pi:pl in a dd kxntriz a: d^Astaz intristid in di:z 
things as we English are. You only have to think of 
pigz dz wi: iyglif «*• ju: ounli hcev td pigk dv 
the King's visit to President Roosevelt of the United 
dd kigz vizit td preziddnt rouzdvelt dv daju:'naitid 
States in the spring of 1939.” 
steits in dd sprig dv naintim po:ti'nain” 
Although the King and Queen were not staying in 
o:ldou dd kig dnd kwi:n wd: not steiig in 
London, our four friends went to look at Buckingham 
lAnddn, aud fo: frendz went td luk ot bAkiyam 
Palace. Mr. Miller: “As you see, it is built of grey 
paelis. mistd mild: “dz ju: si:, it iz bilt dv grei 
stone. How do you like it?” Wood: “Well, I don’t 
stoun. hau du: ju: laik it?” wud: (t wel , ai dount 
think there is anything unusual about it. It looks like 
pigk dedr iz enipiy' Ariju:$udl d'baut if. it luks laik 
all other palaces.” 
o:l Add pselisiz” 
315 
Chapter Thirty-Five (35). 
Storm: “I have heard so much about Buckingham 
sto:m: “ai hav ha:d sou m\tj abaut b\kiyam 
Palace that I thought that the place where the King 
pvelis ddt ai po:t dot da pleis hwed da kiy 
and Queen of England lived must be a very unusual 
ond kwi:n av irjghnd livd mAst bi: d veri \riju:$udl 
building, but I like many of our palaces at home 
bildiy, b\t ai laik meni dv aud pxlisiz dt houm 
better.” 
beta.” 
From Buckingham Palace they walked through a park 
fram b\kiyam paelis dei wo:kt pru: a pa:k 
to the Houses of Parliament. Mr. Miller: “Here you 
ta da hauziz au padamant. mista mila: “hia ju: 
see the building where Parliament, that is, the men 
si: da bildiy hwea padamant , daet iz } da men 
who are chosen by the people to decide what is best 
hu: a: tfouzn bai da pi:pl ta di'said hwot iz best 
for the country, comes together. Altogether there are 
fa da kxntri, k\mz ta'geda. odtageda dear a: 
between 1300 and 1400 people who 
bi'twi:n pa:ti:n hxndrad and ja:'ti:n hxndrad pi:pl hu: 
sit in Parliament, or are members of the two Houses 
sit in padamant, o:r a: membaz au da tu: hauziz 
of Parliament. Of these members, 640 
av padamant. au di:z . membaz, siks h\ndrad and fodi 
are chosen by the people; they make up one of the 
a: tfouzn bai da pi:pl; dei meik a p w\n au da 
316 
The Thirty-Fifth (35th) Chapter. 
two parts of Parliament and are called the House of 
tu: pa:ts gv pa:lgmgnt gnd a: ko:ld dg ham dv 
Commons. The other part, the House of Lords, has 
komdnz. di Add pa:t , dg haus dv h:dz 9 hxz 
about 750 members, made up of men 
gbaut sevn hxndrdd grid fifti memhdz , meid a p gv men 
who are the heads of either very old or very rich 
hu: a: dd hedz gv aidg veri ould o: veri ritf 
families. Since old times such men have had the right 
fsemiliz. sins ould taimz s\tj men hgv heed dg rait 
to be members of the House of Lords. The two Houses 
tg hi: membgz gv dg haus gv lo:dz. dg tu: hauziz 
together make up Parliament. The British Parliament 
tggedg meik a p pa:lgmgnt. dg britif pa:lgmgnt 
is the oldest in the world. It is so old that nobody 
iz di ouldist in dg wg:ld. it iz sou ould dgt noubodi 
really knows when it first started.” 
rigli nouz hwen it fg:st sta:tid yy 
Storm: “The building where Parliament sits is a very 
sto:m: “dg bildiy hweg pa:lgmgnt sits iz g veri 
old one, too, isn’t it?” Mr. Miller: “No, most people think 
ouldwAn,tu: f iznt it? yy mistg milg: “nou,moust pi:pl piyk 
that the building must be very old; but it is only 
dgt dg bildiy m\st bi: veri ould; b\t it iz ounli 
about a hundred years old. It was built from 1840 
gbaut g hAndrgd jigz ould . it wgz bilt frgm eiti:n jo:ti 
to 1852.” As it was Saturday, they were allowed 
tueitim fifti'tu:” gz it wgz soetgdi , dei wg:r g'laud 
head (here) = 
most important 
person 
317 
Chapter Thirty-Five (35). 
■hall 
does not matter = 
is not important 
one third = % 
one half = % 
usually = most 
often 
to go in and look at the whole building, including the 
to gou in ond Iur dt do houl bildiy , in'klu:diy do 
hall where the House of Commons comes together. 
hod hweo do haus ov komonz k\mz togedo. 
“It is the only day that people are allowed to go almost 
“it iz di ounli dei dot pi:pl a:r o'laud togouodmoust 
everywhere inside/’ Mr. Miller explained; “on all 
evrihweo 'irisaid” misto milo iks'pleind; “on od 
other days they do not allow people to go round every- 
a do deiz dei du: not o'lau pi:pl to gou raund euri - 
where.” Storm, Wood, and Brown were very surprised 
hweo. 1 * sto:m, wud, ond braun wo: veri sopraizd 
at the smallness of some of the rooms. They first went 
ol do smodnis ov s\m ov do ru:mz. dei jo:st went 
to the House of Lords. Brown: “This place looks very 
to do haus ov lo:dz. braun: “dis pleis luks veri 
small. There cannot be room for 750 
smod. deo kamot bi: m:m jo sevn h\ndrod ond fijti 
people here.” 
pi:pl hio 11 
Mr. Miller, laughing: “That does not matter, because 
misto milo, la:fiy: “dxt d\z not mceto, bi'koz 
it would be very unusual if more than one third or 
it wud bi: veri \riju:$uol if mo: don w\n po:d o: 
one half of the members were present at the same 
w\n ha:f ov do memboz wo: preznt ot do seim 
time. Usually, only about one hundred of the mem- 
taim. ju:$uoli, ounli obaut w\n h\ndrod ov do mem- 
318 
The Thirty-Fifth (35th) Chapter. 
bers are present, so you see it does not matter much 
boz a: preznt , sou ju: si: it d\z not mreto m\tf 
that the room is small. I must tell you, however, that 
dot do ru:m iz smo:l. ai m\st tel ju:, hau'cvo, dot 
after the Germans were over London between 1940 
a:fto do dp:monz wo:r ouvo Ixndon bVtwi:n nainli:n jo:ti 
and 1945, many buildings, including the 
ond naintim fodi'faiv, meni bildiyz, in'klu:di?j do 
House of Commons, cannot be used. At the present 
haus ov komonz, kivnot bi: ju:zd. ot do preznt 
time this hall is used by the members of the House of 
taim dis hod iz ju:zd bai do memboz ov do haus ov 
Commons. The members of the House of Lords come 
komonz. do memboz ov do haus ov lo:dz k\m 
together in another hall. We will now go and look at 
to'gcdor in o'nxdo hod. wi: wit nau gou ond luk ot 
the place where the House of Commons was situated.” 
do plcis hweo do haus ov komonz woz sitjueitid.” 
When they got there, Mr. Miller continued to explain, 
hwen dei got deo, misto milo kon'tinju:d tu iks'plein, 
“You see that this room was also very small. It was 
*‘ju: si: dot dis ru:m woz odsou veri smod. it woz 
impossible for all the members to find seats here at the 
im posobl for od do memboz to jaind sids hio ot do 
same time, so that when anything unusual was to be 
seim taim , sou dot hwen enipiij a riju. juol woz to bi: 
discussed, and all the members wished to be present, 
dis'kAst, ond od do memboz wift to bi: preznt , 
319 
Chapter Thirty-Five (35). 
flag 
a Norman = a 
man from Nor¬ 
mandy (the north¬ 
western part of 
France) 
a member had to come very early to get a seat.” When 
a membd hied ta k\m veri a:li ta get a si:t” hwen 
they came out again, the teacher pointed with his 
dei keim aul a'gein , da Hdja pointid wid hiz 
stick to one of the towers of the Houses of Parliament, 
stik la w\n av da tauaz av da hauziz au padamant , 
saying, “If Parliament is sitting, that is, if the members 
seih ?, “if padamant iz sitiy , diet iz , if da membaz 
are present in the building, a flag is to be seen at the 
a: preznt in da bildiy, a flieg iz ta bi: si:n at da 
top of that tower.” A little later he continued, “Now 
top av diet tana” a Utl leita hi: kan'tinjw.d , “nan 
we will go to another building which I wish to show 
wi: wit gon tn o'n\da bildiy hwitf ai wij ta fon 
you to-day; it is the Tower, a very old castle situated 
jn: ia'dei; it iz da tana, a veri onld ka:sl sitjneitid 
in the central part of London. They went to have 
in da sentral pad av l\ndan” dei went ta hiev 
a look at it, and on the way Mr. Miller continued to 
a Ink at it , and on da wei mista mila kan'tinju:d tn 
explain, “The Tower was built by William the Con- 
iks'plein , “da tana waz bilt bai wiljam da ko?j- 
queror, a Norman who became King of England, ana 
kara , a no:man hu: bi'keim kiy av iygland , and 
it is nearly 900 years old. After the time of 
it iz niali nain hxndrad jiaz onld. a:fta da taim av 
William the Conqueror, the English kings continued 
wiljam da koykara , di iyglif kiyz kan'tinjn:d 
320 
The Thirty-Fifth (35th) Chapter. 
to live there for many years. Then they built other 
ta liv dea fa meni jiaz. den dei bilt Ada 
castles to live in, and now the Tower has not been 
ka:slz to liv in, and nan da taua haz not bi:n 
used by any king for hundreds of years. It has got its 
ju:zd bai eni kiy fa h\ndradz av jiaz. it haz got its 
name from one of the towers of the building that is 
neim from w\n av da tauaz av da bildirj dot iz 
called ‘the White Tower’/’ 
ko:ld l da hwait taua 
EXERCISE A. 
The hotel-keeper asked the travellers if they had — WORDS: 
themselves in London. The King and Queen had gone enjoy 
to Balmoral — in Scotland. In the United States they wish 
have no king, but a —. The Tower is — 900 years old. castle 
After the time of William the Conqueror the English present 
kings — to live there for many years. Buckingham draw 
Palace is built of grey —. The two parts of Parlia- drew 
ment are called the House of — and the House of —. drawn 
The House of Commons has 640 — Were our uniform 
travellers — to go inside the Houses of Parliament? else 
Yes, they were allowed to go almost —, because it everywhere 
was Saturday. How many members of the House of president 
Lords are usually — at a time? — there are only visit 
about one hundred of the members present. Was it usually 
possible for all 640 — of the House of Commons unusual 
to find seats at a time? No, if they — to find — they Parliament 
had to come very early. member 
321 
Chapter Thirty Five (35). 
House of 
Commons 
House of Lords 
right 
allow 
smallness 
matter 
point 
third 
half 
tower 
flag 
continue 
nearly 
United States 
altogether 
make up 
hall 
Conqueror 
EXERCISE B. 
Why was it not possible to see the King and Queen? . . . 
What was the real reason why the hotel-keeper went 
to see the King? ... Do they have a king in the United 
States? . . . What is Buckingham Palace built of? . . . 
What are the names of the two Houses of Parliament? 
. . . Are the members of the House of Lords chosen by 
the people? ... Is the Parliament building very old? .. . 
When are people allowed to go almost everywhere 
inside the Houses of Parliament? ... Why cannot all 
the members of the House of Commons find seats at 
a time? ... What is to be seen at the top of one of the 
towers of the Houses of Parliament when Parliament 
is sitting? . .. Who built the Tower? . .. Where is the 
Tower situated? ... 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with ‘will’. 
Will John be fourteen years old on his next birthday? 
Answer . . . Question .. .? No, Mr. Miller will not go 
to France this year, but to England. Will the four 
travellers visit places outside London? Answer... 
Question . . .? Yes, they will spend some time at the 
British Museum. Will Mr. Miller have to look after 
his child while Mrs. Miller is away? Answer. . . 
Question . . .? Yes, they will have to work very much 
at their studies until summer. Will they wait for 
Brown at the station? Answer . . . Question . . .? No, 
the boy will not wake up if they are quiet. Will 
it suit Mr. Miller to go to England in the first half of 
322 
The Thirty-Fifth (35th) Chapter. 
July? Answer . .. Question . . .? Yes, it will cost 
Storm more than eight pounds to go to England. Will 
the English King and Queen stay at Balmoral Castle 
the whole summer? Answer . . . Question . . .? No, 
John and Helen will not play in the garden in winter. 
Will the three young men be able to speak English 
this summer? Answer . . . Question . ..? Yes, they 
will be able to understand the porters, too, when they 
have been there for some time. 
Chapter Thirty-Six (36). 
The Thirty-Sixth (36th) Chapter. 
THE EARLY HISTORY OF ENGLAND 
none = no one 
The same evening they were having coffee after 
da seim i:vni?j dei wa: hunrirj koji a:jta 
dinner at the hotel, and talking about the Tower, 
dindr at da hou'tel , dnd to:kiy a'bant da tana , 
which they had seen in the afternoon, and about the 
hwitf dei had si:n in di 'a:jtann:n , and a bant da 
king who built it. While they were discussing these 
kiy hn: bilt it. hwail dei wa: dis'k\siy di:z 
things, they found that none of them knew very much 
piyz, dei fannd dat n\n av dam njn: veri m\tf 
about the history of England before the time of William 
a bant da histari av iygland bi'fo: da taim av wiljam 
the Conqueror. “Won’t you tell us something about 
da kaykara. “wonnt jn: tel as SAmpiy a bant 
the early history of England to-night, Mr. Miller?” 
di a:li histari av iygland tanait, mista mila ?” 
the young men asked the teacher. “It’s raining now, 
da j\y men a:skt da ti:tfa “its reiniy nan , 
and we are tired after having walked so much this 
and wi: a: taiad a:fta hieviy wo:kt son m\tf dis 
afternoon, so if you are no-t too tired to talk, we should 
{ a:ftann:n, son if jn: a: not tn: taiad ta to:k f wi: Jud 
like very much to stay at home this evening and hear 
laik veri m\tj ta stei at honm dis i:vniy and hia 
324 
The Thirty-Sixth (36th) Chapter. 
something about England and the English before the 
SAmpiy a'baut iygland dnd di iyglif bi'fo: da 
time of William the Conqueror/’ “No, only my feet 
taim av wiljam da koykara” “ nou , ounli mai fi:t 
are tired, not my head. It is tiring to walk about 
a: taiad , not mai hed. it iz taiarirj ta wo:k a'baut 
town on a hot day like to-day, so it will be nice to 
taim on a hot dei laik ta'dei, sou it wil bi: nais ta 
have a quiet evening at the hotel. Well, let us start 
hiev a kwaiat i:vniy at do hou'tel . wet , let as sta:t 
at the beginning, as far back as history can take us. 
at da bi'giniy, az fa: biek az histari kan teik as. 
We must go back about 2,000 years, to the time 
wi: mAst gou bxk a'baut tu: pauzand jiaz , ta da taim 
when Caesar, the Roman general, sailed to England 
hwen si:za , da rouman djenaral, seild tu iygland 
with an army of Roman soldiers. At that time the 
wid an a:mi av rouman souldpz. at diet taim da 
country was named Britain, and the people living in 
kAntri waz neimd britan , and da pi:pl liviy in 
it were called Britons or Celts.” 
it iva: ko:ld britanz o: kelts” 
Brown: “When did the country get the name of Eng- 
braun: “hwen did da kAntri get da neim av iy- 
land?” 
gland?” 
Mr. Miller: “It was not named England until several 
mista mila: “it waz not neimd iygland An'til sevral 
soldier 
325 
Chapter Thirty-Six (36). 
a nation = the 
people of a coun¬ 
try 
He fights, he 
fought, he has 
fought \fails, Jo:t , 
Ml 
hundred years later. Rome in Italy, where the Romans 
hAndrdd jiaz leitd. roum in itali , hived da roumanz 
came from, had conquered many of the nations of 
keim from , had koykad meni av da neifanz av 
Europe at that time, and in the year 54 B. C. 
juarap at dcet taim, and in da jia fifti'fo: hi: si: 
(before Christ) they had got as far as the Channel 
(bi'fo: kraist) dei had got az fa:r az da tfivnl 
between England and France. In that year, Caesar 
hi'twi:n iy gland and fra:ns. in divt jia , si:za 
sailed across the Channel to Britain with an army of 
seild akros da tfwnl ta britan wid an a:mi av 
Roman soldiers to fight the Britons. An army of 
rouman souldpz ta fait da britanz. an a:mi av 
Britons, under their general Cassivelaunus, was waiting 
britanz , a nda dea d^enaral ktvsivi'lomas , waz weitiy 
for them, and a great battle was fought near the river 
fa dam , and a greit btetl waz fo:t nia da riva 
Thames between the two armies. The Roman soldiers 
temz bi'twi:n da tu: a:miz. da rouman souldpz 
were far too good for the Britons; but some time after 
wa: fa: tu: gud fa da britanz; b\t s\m taim a:\ta 
the battle the Romans returned to their own country. 
da baetl da roumanz ri'tamd ta dear oun kxntri. 
About a hundred years later, however, a large part of 
a'baut a hxndrad jiaz leita , hau'eva , a la:d$ pa:t av 
Britain was conquered by the Romans. 
britan waz koykad bai da roumanz. 
326 
The Thirty-Sixth (36th) Chapter. 
"For about 350 years, Rome continued to 
(, for obaut pri: hxndrod dnd fifti jioz , roum kdritinju:d to 
send soldiers to Britain, and it was not long before the 
send souldpz to britdn , dnd it Wdz not lor) bi'fo: do 
Britons and their conquerors became quite good 
britonz ond deo koykoroz bi'keim kwait gud 
friends.” Storm: "They brought many new ideas to 
frendz” sto:m: “dei bro:t meni nju: ai'dioz to 
Britain, too, didn’t they?” Mr. Miller: "Yes, Britain, 
briton, tudidnt dei?” misto mild: “jes , britdn , 
as you know, is an island, that is, a piece of land with 
dz ju: noil , iz dn ailond , beet iz f d pi:s dv laend wid 
water on all sides, and the Britons, therefore, had lived 
wo:tdr on o:l saidz 9 ond do britonz , beofohod livd 
quite alone and had not learned all the new things 
kwait oloun ond hod not lo:nd o:l do nju: piyz 
which had come from the East. But now the Romans 
hwitf hod k\m from di i:st . b\t nau do roumonz 
taught them many modern things. They made good 
to:t bom meni modon piyz. dei meid gud 
roads through the country, and built bridges across the 
roudz pru: do k\ntri 9 ond bilt brid$iz okros. do 
rivers. But at last the Romans had to leave the country. 
rivoz. b\t ot la:st do roumonz hsed to li:v do k\ntri. 
Rome itself was in difficulties, and consequently the 
roum it'self woz in difikoltiz , ond konsikwontli do 
soldiers were called back.” 
souldpz wo: ko:ld biek 
quite = very 
difficulty = 
that which is 
difficult 
327 
Chapter Thirty-Six (36). 
a tribe = a very 
small nation, espe¬ 
cially in old times 
an enemy = the 
opposite of a 
friend 
one enemy 
two enemies 
He sets, he set, he 
has set [sefs,se£,se/]. 
fire 
Storm: “And then the Britons could enjoy all the 
sto:m: “ond den dd britdnz kud in'dpi o:l di 
advantages the Romans had brought them, without 
odvamtid^iz dd roumonz hdd bro:t ddm , wid'aut 
having foreign soldiers in the country!” 
hieviy forin souldpz in dd k\ntri!” 
Mr. Miller: “No, for as soon as the Romans had left 
mistd mild: “nou , /ar oz su:n dz dd roumdnz hdd left 
the country, the Britons began to have difficulties with 
dd k\ntri, dd britdnz bi'gam td hsev difikdltiz wid 
the Piets and Scots, two tribes who lived in the north. 
dd pikts dnd skots , tu: traibz hu: livd in dd no:p. 
These two tribes had always been the enemies of the 
di:z tu: traibz hdd o:lwdZ bi:n di enimiz dv dd 
Britons, but as long as the Romans were there, the 
britdnz , b\t dz log dz dd roumdnz Wd: ded , dd 
Piets and the Scots had lived in peace with the Britons. 
pikts dnd dd skots hod livd in pi:s wid do britdnz. 
Now they would not let them live in peace any longer. 
nau dei wud not let dom liv in pi:s eni loygo. 
They sent armies down to fight with the Britons; they 
dei sent a:miz daun to fait wid do britdnz; dei 
set fire to their towns and took their children away 
set faid td ded taunz dnd tuk ded tfildrdn owei 
from them. The Britons could not fight them alone, 
frdm ddm. dd britdnz kud not fait dom oloun y 
because they had not done any fighting while the 
bi'koz dei hod not d\n eni faitiy hwail do 
328 
The Thirty-Sixth (36th) Chapter. 
Romans were in Britain, and things went badly for 
roumdnz wa:r in britan , and piyz went bwdli jo: 
them.” Wood: “Couldn’t they get any help?” 
dam” wud: “kudnt del get eni help?” 
Mr. Miller: “Yes, they sent word to three tribes living 
mists mils: “jes, dei sent wa:d ta pri: traibz twig 
in northern Europe, asking them to come and help 
in na:dan juarap , a:skiy dam ta k\m and help 
them fight their enemies. The three tribes were the 
dam fait dear enimiz. da pri: traibz wa: da 
Jutes, the Saxons, and the Angles. The Angles were 
dju.-ts, da sveksnz , and di tvyglz. di wyglz wa: 
the largest tribe, and from their name they all got the 
da la:d$ist traib , and /ram dea neim dei o:l gat da 
name of 'English’. The English liked the island of 
neim av ‘iyglif. di iVQlif laikt di ailand av 
Britain so well that they stayed there after the war 
britan sou wel dat dei steid dea a:fta da wo: 
with the Piets and the Scots was over.” Storm: “I can 
wid da pikts and da skats waz ouva” sta:m: “ai kan 
well understand that. I should like to stay a little longer 
wel a ndastcvnd diet, ai fud laik ta stei a litl layga 
myself!” Mr. Miller: “Me too! Well, for the next 
mai'self!” mista mila: “mi: tu:! wel , fa da nekst 
70 years Angles and Saxons continued to come to 
sevnti jiaz wyglz and sxksnz karitinju:d ta k\m tu 
England, as Britain is now called, from the Continent. 
iggland , az britan iz nau ka:ld , jram da kantinant . 
to send word ~ to 
send a letter, or to 
send a person to 
tell something 
war = fighting 
continent 
Africa is a conti¬ 
nent, Europe is a 
continent. 
329 
Chapter Thirty-Six (36). 
the greater part 
(of only two 
parts); the 
greatest part (of 
more than two 
parts) 
mountains 
the Continent = 
the European con¬ 
tinent = all the 
countries of 
Europe together, 
except England, 
Wales, Scotland, 
and Ireland 
ship = big boat 
They conquered the greater part of the country from 
dei kaykad da greita pad av da k\ntri fram 
the Britons, whom they had come to help, and the 
da britanz , hu:m dei had k\m ta help , and da 
Welsh, as the English called the Britons or Celts, had 
welf , az di iyglif kodd da britanz a: kelts , hu>d 
to go to the mountains in Wales to be able to live in 
la gou ta da rnauntinz in weilz ta bi: eibl ta liv in 
peace. The tribes that came from the Continent had at 
pi:s . da traibz dat keim fram da kantinant hivd at 
first several kings, but in 825 Egbert 
fa:st sevral ki?jz, b\t in eit h\ndrad and twenti'faiv egbad 
became king of all England. While he was king, the 
bi'keim kiy av ad iygland. hivail hi: waz ki?j , da 
Vikings from Norway and Denmark began to come to 
vaikiyz fram na.wei and denma:k bigven ta k\m tu 
England. For 200 years the English and the 
iygland. fa tu: hxndrad fiaz di iyglif and da 
Vikings were at war with each other, and the Vikings 
vaikiyz wa:r at wa: wid i:tf Ada , and da vaikiyz 
came nearly every summer in their long ships. They 
keim niali evri s\ma in dea lay fips. dei 
set fire to the towns of the English and sailed back 
set faia ta da taunz av di iyglif and seild btek 
with their ships full of the fine things they had taken 
wid dea fips ful av da fain piyz dei had teikn 
from them.” Brown: “Did the Vikings ever conquer 
fram dam” braun: “did da vaikiyz eva kaykar 
330 
The Thirty-Sixth (36th) Chapter. 
England?” 
irjgldnd?” 
Mr. Miller: ‘'Yes, they did, and from 1016 until 
mistd mild: “jes, dei did , dnd from ten 'siks'ti:n a n'til 
1042 there were even Danish kings in England. 
ten fo:ti'tu: bed wd:r i:vdn deinij kiyz in iyghnd. 
In 1066 the Normans, who were Vikings that 
in ten siksti'siks bd no:mdnz , hu: Wd: vaikiyz bdt 
had conquered the north of France and learned to 
hdd koykdd bd no:p dv fra:ns dnd h:nd id 
speak French, conquered England, and William, who 
spi:k frenf , koykdd igghnd , dnd wiljdm, hu: 
was now called the Conqueror, was made king. That 
Wdz nau ko:ld bd koykdrd, Wdz meid kiy. bset 
was the last time that an army from the European 
Wdz bd la:st taim bdt dn a:mi jrdm bd judrd'pi:dn 
continent conquered Britain. Many other countries 
kontindni kogkdd britdn. meni a bd kxntriz 
have made war against England; Spain sent a large 
hdv meid wo:r d'geinst iyghnd; spein sent d la:d$ 
number of ships against her, but neither the Spaniards 
n\mbdr dv fips d'geinst hdb\t naibd bd spsenjddz 
nor any other nations have ever conquered her after 
no:r eni \bd neifdnz hdv evd kogkdd hd: a:ftd 
the Battle of Hastings in 1066. 
bd baetl dv heistiyz in ten siksti'siks. 
"In our time we can see how the different conquerors 
“in aud taim wi: kdn si: hau bd difrdnt koykdrdz 
the Spaniards = 
the people living 
in Spain 
331 
Chapter Thirty-Six (36). 
Anglo-Saxon = 
the language spo¬ 
ken by the Angles 
and the Saxons 
of Britain have left their impression on the country, 
ov britdn hov left dedr im'prefdn on do k\niri , 
on its people and its language. In the north and east 
on its pi:pl ond its lxygwid$. in do no:p ond i:st 
of England, there are many towns with Danish and 
ov iyglond, deor a: meni taunz wid deinif ond 
Norwegian names, for example, Derby and Grimsby, 
no:'wi:dpn neimz, for ig'za:mpl , da:bi ond grimzbi , 
and the people use many old Danish and Norwegian 
ond do pi:pl ju:z meni ould deinif ond no:'wi:dpn 
words. In the English language we find many words 
wo:dz. in di iyglif l&ygu)id$ wi: faind meni wo:dz 
which the English have borrowed from the Normans, 
hwitf di iyglif hov boroud from do no:monz 9 
and just as the language is a mixture of French and 
ond d$\st oz do lseygwid$ iz o mikstfor ov frenf ond 
Anglo-Saxon, the people, too, mixed with their con- 
' xyglou's&ksn , do pi:pl, tumikst wid deo koy- 
querors. And the mixture is a good one, I think. But 
koroz. ond do mikstfor iz o gud w\n , ai piyk. b\t 
the Welsh, who went to the mountains in the west, 
do welf, hu: went to do mauntinz in do west , 
did not mix so much with the different conquerors of 
did not miks sou m\tf wid do difront koykoroz ov 
Britain. The enemies could not cross the maun tains 
briton . di enimiz kud not kros do mauntinz 
and, therefore, had to leave them in peace, so that 
ond, deofo:, heed to li:v dom in pi:s 9 sou dot 
332 
The Thirty-Sixth (36th) Chapter. 
to-day we find people in Wales who are quite different 
to dei wi: faind pi:pl in wcilz hu: a: kwait difront 
from the usual English people. They are darker, they 
from do ju:$uol iyglif pi:pL dei a: da:ko f dei 
like very much to sing and to play, and they all feel 
laik veri m\tf id sir) ond to plei , dnd dei o:l fid 
that they are Welsh, not English. But for several 
ddt dei a: welf , not iyglif• b\t \o sevrol 
hundred years the three peoples, the Welsh, the Scotch, 
h\ndrod jioz do pri: pi:plz , do welf , do skotf , 
the Scotch = the 
Scots 
and the English, have lived in peace with each other 
ond di iyglif , hov livd in pi:s wid idf a do 
in Great Britain. I should explain, however, that the 
in greit briton. ai fud iks'plein , hau'evo , dot do 
Scotch do not like to be called Scotch. They themselves 
skotf du: not laik to bi: kodd skotf. dei dom'selvz 
always use the word 'Scots’/’ 
odwoz ja:z do wo:d 'skots 
Storm: “It has been very interesting to learn all this, 
sto:m: “it hoz bi:n veri intristirj to lo:n o.l dis t 
and it has given us a greater understanding of the 
ond it hoz givn as o greitor \ndostxndiy ov do 
country we are visiting. It was a good thing that we 
k\ntri wi: a: vizitiy. it woz o gud piy dot wi: 
stayed at home to-night.” 
steid ot houm to'nait. if 
333 
Chapter Thirty-Six (36). 
EXERCISE A. 
WORDS: 
none 
history 
tiring 
beginning 
Roman 
Rome 
general 
soldier 
name (verb) 
nation 
the Channel 
Christ 
B.C. 
battle 
army 
quite 
difficulty 
Briton 
Britain 
Celt 
Piet 
Scot 
Scotch 
tribe 
enemy 
peace 
set 
fire 
fight 
fought 
The three young men did not know much about the 
— of England before William the Conqueror. —, they 
asked their teacher to tell them — about early times 
in England. They had been — so much in the after¬ 
noon that they had all got very —. The teacher told 
them about the Roman — who had sailed to England 
with his —. He also told them about the — that was 
fought between the — of Caesar and that of Cassive- 
launus. 
Long after the battle the Romans — a large — of 
the country. Did the Romans and the Britons con¬ 
tinue to be —? No, it was not long before the 
Britons and their — became — good friends. Why had 
the Britons continued to live — alone, so that they had 
not — the many new things from the —? Because 
Britain is an — with water on all —. Why did the 
Romans have to — the country again? Because — 
itself was in —. What two — from the north began 
to — with the Britons after the Romans had —? The 
Piets and the Scots sent — down to — with the Britons. 
Whom did the Britons ask to come and — them against 
their enemies? They sent word to three tribes — in 
northern — to come and — them. Is there — between 
the different people living in Britain now? No, the —, 
the —, and the English all live together in — now. 
EXERCISE B. 
What were the travellers talking about while they 
were having coffee after dinner? ... What was the 
334 
The Thirty-Sixth (36th) Chapter. 
weather like that evening? . .. How far back did they 
start their view of the history of England? . .. What 
nation had conquered many of the European nations 
about the year 50 B. C.? . . . For how long did Rome 
continue to send soldiers to Britain? . . . What good 
did the Romans do to the Britons? . . . Why could the 
Britons not fight their enemies alone after the 
Romans had left? . . . Whose ships began to come to 
England while Egbert was king? . . . What did the 
Vikings want in England? . . . Who was made king 
after the Normans had conquered England? .. . Has 
England had wars with other nations since then? . . . 
What is the name of the people who live in Wales? .. . 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with do, does, did, 
have, has, had’. 
Does it blow harder at sea than ashore? Answer . . . 
Question . . .? No, it only rains very little in London 
during the month of July. Did snow ever fall in the 
country where the four travellers came from? Answer 
. . . Question . . .? No, there did not seem to be any 
end to London. Has any snow fallen in your town 
during the last six months? Answer. . . Question 
. . .? No, it has not rained to-day. Do you wash 
yourself every morning? Answer . . . Question . . .? 
No, the Smith baby does not wash itself; it is too 
young for that. Did the four travellers enjoy themselves 
in London? Answer . . . Question . . .? Yes, Mrs. Smith 
washed herself before she went to the birthday-party. 
Have you not made yourself ready yet? Answer . . . 
fighting 
northern 
Jute 
Saxon 
Angle 
Welsh 
war 
mountain 
Viking 
continent 
island 
against 
Spain 
Spaniard 
Norman 
Anglo-Saxon 
mixture 
mix 
usual 
ship 
nice 
Italy 
conquer 
335 
Chapter Thirty-Six (36). 
Question . . .? Yes, I have washed myself in hot water. 
Had the young men walked until they had become 
tired? Answer . . . Question . . .? Yes, they had often 
talked themselves sleepy in the evenings in their own 
country. 
336 
Chapter Thirty-Seven (37). 
The Thirty-Seventh (37th) Chapter. 
ENGLISH INSTITUTIONS 
One day our four friends passed a hospital. Outside 
war dei auo jo: frendz pa:st o hospitl. 'aut'said 
they saw a placard or poster, on which was written poster = placard 
dei so: o plieka:d o: pousto, on bwitj woz ritn 
in big letters: £ 10,000 still needed to pay for 
in big letoz: ten pauzond paundz stil ni:did to pei jo 
last year. 
la:st jio. 
Brown: “What is the meaning of the placard? Would 
braun: “hwoi iz do mi:niy ov do plwka:d? wild 
you be kind enough to explain that to us, Mr. Miller?” 
ju: bi: kaind Vn\f tu iks'plein diet tu as, misto milo?” 
Mr. Miller: “Yes, that means that the hospital still 
misto milo: {t jes, duet mi:nz dot do hospitl stil 
needs £ 10,000 to be able to pay its bills 
ni:dz ten pauzond paundz to bi: eibl to pei its bilz 
for last year. Many of the big hospitals in England 
fo la:st jio . meni ov do big hospitlz in iyglond 
are private, that is, neither the State nor the towns state = nation 
a: praivit, diet iz, naido do steil no: do taunz 
in which they are situated have anything to do with 
in hwitj dei a: sitjueitid hsev enipiy to du: wid 
them, so that they do not get any money from the 
dom, sou dot dei du: not get eni mAni from do 
10/1 
337 
ogQ 
Chapter Thirty-Seven (37). 
towns or from the State to pay for their work.” Brown: 
taunz o: from do steit to pei fo Seo wo:k” braim: 
“How do they get money, then?” 
“hau da: dei get m\ni 9 den?” 
Mr. Miller: “It is given to them by private people. 
mistd mih: “it iz givn to bom bai praivit pi:pl. 
Money for the hospitals is often collected on special 
m\ni /a 0a hospitlz iz o:fn kolektid on spefol 
days in the year. There is, for example, a special 
deiz in do - jio. deor iz 9 for ig'za:mpl 9 a spefol 
Saturday called Hospital Saturday on which a lot of 
sxtodi ko:ld hospitl ssetodi on hwitf a lot ov 
money is collected for the hospitals in the streets, at 
m\ni iz koiektid /a do hospitlz in do slri:ts 9 at 
the doors, etc. And as you have seen just now, posters 
do do:z 9 it'setro. ond oz ju: hov si:n d$\st nau 9 poustoz 
church 
tell people all the year round that the hospitals need 
tel pi:pl o:l do jio raund dot do hospitlz ni:d 
money. In some countries, most of the hospitals, 
m\ni. in s\m kxntriz , moust ov do hospitlz , 
schools, and churches are paid for either by the State 
sku:lz 9 ond tfo:tfiz a: peid fo: aido bai do steit 
or by the towns. They are what we call public and get 
o: bai do taunz. dei a: hwot wi: ko:l pxblik ond get 
public help; but in England this is not always so. Here 
p\blik help; b\t in iyglond dis iz not o.iwoz sou . hio 
those three institutions are often private. I have 
douz pri: insti'tju:/ on z a:r o:fn praivit. ai hov 
338 
The Thirty-Seventh (37th) Chapter. 
already mentioned one of them, the hospitals. 
o:l rcdi menfand w\n av 6am, da hospitlz . 
to mention = to 
speak of 
'‘Now I will tell you a little about the schools. They 
“nau ai wil tel ju: a litl a'baut 6a sku:lz. 6ei 
may be divided into higher and lower schools. Most 
mei bi: di'vaidid inb ham and Iona sku:lz. moust 
to divide = to 
make into parts 
lower schools are paid for by the towns. They are open 
loua sku:lz a: peid fa: bai 6a taunz . 6ei a:r oupan 
to everybody, and nobody has to pay anything for 
tu cvribodi , and noubodi hxz ta pei enipiy fa 
sending his children to one of the lower schools. The 
sendiy hiz tfildran la w\n ao da loua sku:lz. da 
pupils enter the lower schools, which are also called 
pjucplz enta 6a loua sku:lz 9 hwitf a:r o:lsou ko:ld 
primary = first 
the Primary or Elementary Schools, at the age of 
6a praimari a:r cli'mentari sku.lz , at 6i eid$ av 
What is his age? 
= How old is he? 
five. When they are about eleven years old, they pass 
faiv. hwen 6ei a:r a'baut i'levn fiaz ould 9 6ei pa:s 
they pass on to = 
they are moved to 
on to the higher or Secondary Schools, which they 
on ta 6a haiar o: sekandari sku:lz , hwitf 6ei 
do not leave until they are between sixteen and 
du: not li:v \ritil 6ci a: bi'twim siksti:n and 
secondary = se¬ 
cond 
eighteen years of age. Most of the higher or Secondary 
eitim fiaz av eid$. moust av 6a haiar o: sekandari 
Schools are paid for by the towns. It does not cost 
sku:lz a: peid fo: bai 6a taunz . it d\z not kost 
anything to send children to these schools. However, 
enipiy ta send tfildran ta 6i:z sku:l2. hau'eva , 
339 
Chapter Thirty-Seven (37). 
a foreigner = a 
person from 
another country 
though = although 
national = of the 
whole nation 
there is also a large number of private Secondary 
beor iz o:lsou a //a.dj n\mbdr dv praivit sekdnddri 
Schools. 
sku.lz. 
“The third institution I mentioned is the Church. 
“bd pd:d insti'tju:fdn ai menfdnd iz bd tfd:tf. 
People usually think that the English are very religious. 
pi:pl ju:$udli piyk bdt bi iyglif a: veri ri'lidps. 
Foreigners have the idea that all Englishmen go to 
forindz hxv bi m'did bdt o:l iyglif man gou id 
church v€ry often, so I think you will be surprised to 
tfddf ver i souai piyk ju: wil bi: sd'praizd Id 
hear that the Church of England is not a State church. 
hid bdt bd dv iggfond iz not a steit tfd:tf. 
It is called the Church of England, but though it has 
it iz ko:ld bd tfd:tf dv iyghnd , b\t bon it hicz 
this name, it is not a State church, because it does 
bis neim , it iz not a steit tfd'.tf, bi'koz it d\z 
not get any money from the State. We may, however, 
not get eni m\ni from bd steit. wi: mei , hau'evd , 
say that it is a national church, because more Eng- 
sei bdt it iz a neefdndl tfd:tf , bi'koz mo:r iy- 
lishmen are members of this church than of any other 
glifmon a: memboz ov bis tfo:lJ bon ov eni \bo 
church in England. 
tfd.’if in iyglond . 
“You see, therefore, that some institutions which are 
“ju: si:, beojo:, bdt s\m insii'tju:fdnz hwitf a: 
340 
The Thirty-Seventh (37th) Chapter. 
usually public in other countries are very often private 
ju:$uoli pAblik in a do k\ntriz a: veri o:fn praivit 
in England/’ 
in vyglond .” 
Storm: '‘Yes, and those are not the only things in 
sto:m: “jes , and. douz a: not di ounli piyz in 
which the English are different from the people in 
hwitf di iyglif a: dijront from do pi:pl in 
most other countries. I think that England and Sweden 
mousi \do kAntriz. ai piyk dot iyglond ond swi.dn 
are the only two countries where the traffic keeps to 
a: di ounli tu: kAntriz hweo do trxfik ki:ps to 
the left. If you come from a country where the traffic 
do left, if ju: kAm from o kAntri hweo do trsefik 
keeps to the right, it is important when you cross a 
ki:ps to do rait , it iz im'po.tont hwen ju: kros o 
street always to look in both directions. It is not a 
stri:t o:lwoz to Ink in boup di'rekfonz. it iz not o 
good thing to take chances. Why do England and 
gud pig to teik tfa:nsiz. hwai du: iyglond ond 
Sweden keep to the left, when most other nations in 
swi:dn ki:p to do left , hwen mousi Ado neijonz in 
the world keep to the right?” 
do wo:ld ki:p to do rait?” 
Mr. Miller: “I am afraid I can’t answer that question. 
misto milo: “ai om o'freid ai ka:nt a:nso dirt kwestfon. 
However, when foreigners come to England, it only 
hau'evo , hwen forinoz kAm tu iyglond , it ounli 
He keeps, he kept, 
he has kept [ki:ps, 
kept, kept]. 
341 
Chapter Thirty-Seven (37). 
monetary = 
which has to do 
with money 
equal to = th e 
same as 
takes them a short time to get used to it. There are 
teiks ddm d fo:t taim td get ju:st tu it. dedr a: 
many other things in which the English are different 
mcni a dd piyz in hwitf di iyglif a: difrdnt 
from other nations. As an example I might mention 
frdm \dd -ncifdnz. dz dn ig'za.mpl ai mait menfdn 
the English monetary system. Most countries in the 
di mAnitdri sistim. moust k\ntriz in dd 
world now use the decimal system. The decimal 
Wd:ld nau ju:z dd desimdl sistim. dd desimdl 
system, as you know, is built upon figures which may 
sistim, dz ju: noil, iz bilt d'pon figdz hwitf mei 
be divided by ten. But the English continue to use 
bi: di'vaidid bai ten. b\t di iggHf kdn'tinju: td fu:z 
their pounds, shillings, and pence. 
ded paundz, filiyz , dnd pens. 
“Their weights and measures, too, are different from 
“ded weits dnd mepz, tu:, a: difrdnt frdm 
those of other countries. In some countries they still 
douz dv js.dd kxntriz. in s\m k\ntriz dei stil 
have a weight called a pound, which is equal to 
hsev d weit ko:ld d paund, hwitf iz i.kwdl td 
500 grammes (or half a kilogramme), but in Eng- 
faiv h\ndrdd griemz (o: ha:f a kilogrwm), b\t in in¬ 
land one pound (1 lb) is equal to 454 
ghnd w\n paund iz i:kwdl td fo: hxndrdd dnd fifti'fo: 
grammes. While other countries speak of kilometres, 
grxmz. hwail a dd kxntriz spifk dv kitdmi.tdz. 
342 
The Thirty-Seventh (37th) Chapter. 
metres, and centimetres, the English have such 
mi:tdz , ond sentimi:toz f di iyglif keev s\tf 
measures as miles and yards. The length of a mile is 
mepz dz mailz dnd ja:dz. dd leyp dv d mail iz 
equal to 1.61 kilometres, and the point =. 
i.kwdl td w\n point siks w\n kilomidoz, dnd dd 
length of a yard is equal to 0.91 metre, naught [na:/] = o 
leyp ov d ja:d iz i:kwdl td no:t point nain w\n mi:to. 
A yard has 36 inches. 
o ja:d hwz pd:ti'siks infiz. 
“The main reason why the English do not change their 
“Sd mein ri:zn hwai di iyglif du: not lfeind$ deo 
weights and measures is that they like to keep to the 
weits ond mcpz iz ddt dei laik td ki:p td di 
old things, and the most important reason for this is, 
ould pirjz , ond dd moust impodont ri:zn fd dis iz 9 
perhaps, that England is an island, cut off by the sea 
pd'haepSy ddt iyglond iz dn ailond , k\t o:f bai dd si: 
from the other countries of the world. When the 
frdm di Add kxntriz dv dd wd:ld. hwen di 
English cross the Channel, they seem to feel that they 
iyglif kros dd tjsenl , dei si:m td fid ddt dei 
enter quite another world, different from their own, 
entd kwait d'nxdd Wddd, difrdnt frdm dedr oun y 
and mostly they do not like what they see in other 
dnd moustli dei du: not laik hwot dei si: in \do 
countries so well as they do their own things.” 
k\ntriz sou wel oz dei du: deor oun piyz'' 
343 
Chapter Thirty-Seven (37). 
WORDS: 
hospital 
placard 
poster 
private 
public 
state 
church 
institution 
mention 
divide 
elementary 
primary 
secondary 
age 
religious 
though 
national 
keep 
kept 
system 
decimal 
monetary 
weight 
measure 
length 
pound (lb) 
equal 
gramme 
kilogramme 
metre 
EXERCISE A. 
One day the young men saw a — or poster on which 
they read that a — needed money to pay its bills. 
The hospitals are not all paid for by the towns or the 
—; many of them are —. In some countries the 
hospitals, schools, and — are all —. English schools 
are — into higher and lower schools. The children 
enter the lower schools at the — of five. The Church 
of England is not a State church, but it may be called 
a — church. In England and Sweden traffic — to the 
left. The English — system is different from that of 
most other countries, too. In some countries they still 
have a — called a —, which is — to 500 grammes. The 
English — is — to 454 grammes. Instead of kilometres, 
metres, and centimetres, the English — are —, —, and 
inches. The — of a mile is — to 1.61 kilometres. 
EXERCISE B. 
What does it mean that an institution is public? . . . 
What three institutions in England do you know that 
are mostly private? . . . How do many hospitals get 
money to pay for their work? ... At what age do the 
children begin school? . . . Where do the children pass 
on to from the Primary or Elementary Schools? . . . 
Why do we call the Church of England a national 
church? . . . Why must foreigners look in both direc¬ 
tions when they cross streets in London? ... To which 
side of the street does the English traffic keep? . . . 
What is the English monetary system like? . . . What 
are the English measures? . . . What is the length of 
a yard? . . . What is the main reason why the English 
keep to their old systems? . . . 
344 
The Thirty-Seventh (37th) Chapter. 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with 'can, could, 
may, might’. 
Can Mr. Miller speak English? Answer . . . Question 
. . .? Yes, the young men can understand most of what 
they hear now. Can Brown afford to buy his clothes 
in Bond Street? Answer . . . Question . . .? Yes, you 
can buy many things at Self ridge’s; the Londoners 
say: everything from a pin to an elephant. May you 
take any cigars along with you into England without 
paying duty? Answer . . . Question . . .? No, you may 
not get into England without a passport. May people 
see the inside of Parliament? Answer . . . Question ...? 
Yes, you may drive on the left side of the streets of 
London, because in England all traffic keeps to the 
left. Could the young men hear what the speaker in 
the park was saying? Answer . . . Question . . .? No, 
the King’s carriage could not pass through Marble 
Arch, because it was too narrow. Could the young 
men get their holidays at the same time? Answer . . . 
Question . . .? No, they could not see the King and 
Queen, because they were in Scotland. Might our 
friends swim in the Serpentine if they wanted to? 
Answer... Question ...? Yes, he might take the seventy- 
five cigars into England without paying duty, because 
each of the four men took some of them through the 
Customs. Might they see any part of Hampton Court 
Palace? Answer . . . Question . . .? Yes, the speakers 
in Hyde Park might say what they wanted to; nobody 
stopped them 
centimetre 
yard 
foreigner 
naught 
point 
345 
Chapter Thirty-Eight (38). 
The Thirty-Eighth (38th) Chapter. 
A VISIT TO AN ENGLISH FAMILY 
Before they started on the trip, Storm’s manager had 
bi'fo: dei sta.tid on do trip, sto:mz msenidp hod 
asked him to go one day to the manager of the London 
a:ski him to gou war dei to do mvenidpr ov do lAndon 
branch of the firm. It would interest the young man, 
bra:nf ov do fo:m. it wud intrist do j\?j mam, 
he thought, to see the work in a big English office, 
hi: pod, to si: do wo:k in o big iyglif of is, 
and he? would learn something which might be useful 
ond hi: wud lo:n SAmpiy hwitf mait bi: ju:sful 
to him later on in his work at home. 
to him leitor on in hiz wo:k ot houm. 
So one day during the last week of their stay in 
sou war dei djuoriy do la:st wi:k ov deo stei in 
London, Storm went to pay a visit to the London 
lAndon, sto:m went to pei o vizit to do lAndon 
office. Mr. Edwards, the manager, greeted him very 
ofis. mistor edwodz, do msenidp, gri:tid him veri 
kindly. “How do you do,” he said; “your manager 
kaindli. “haudju'du:,” hi: sed; “jo: msenidp 
wrote and told me that you were coming, so I have 
rout ond tould mi: dot ju: wo: kAmiy, sou ai hov 
been expecting you. But come into my private office 
bi:n iks'pektiy ju:. bAt kAm into mai praivit ofis 
branch = part of 
a firm, situated at 
another place than 
the main firm 
346 
The Thirty-Eighth (38th) Chapter. 
and tell me what you have been doing. YQur manager 
and tel mi: hwot ju: hav bi:n du:iy. jo: mamidpr 
and I are old friends, you know. He was over here 
and ai a:r ould frcndz, ju: non . hi: waz oiwo hid 
to study the business when I was a young man in 
to stxdi dd biznis hwen ai waz a /at? mien in 
this same office, so we know each other very well. I 
dis seim ojis, sou ivi: non i:if Ada veri wel . ai 
shall be glad to show you round the place.” round (here) = 
fal bi: glied ta Jou ju: raund da pleis ” 
A little later, when they were walking round, Mr. 
a litl leita, hwen dei wa: wo:kiy raund, mistar 
Edwards showed him several modern machines that 
edwadz foud him sevral modan ma'Jimz dat 
they had just bought. “Come and have a look at this 
dei had d$Ast bo:t. “kAm and hcev a luk at dis 
one,” he said, showing him an adding machine. “It 
WAn,” hi: sed, fouiy him an tediy ma'fim. “it 
is a very useful machine, which saves us a lot of time. 
iz a veri ju:sful ma'fim, hwitf seivz as a lot av taim. 
Before we got it, we had a man who sat all day adding 
bi'jo: wi: got it, wi: hied a mxn hu: sset o:l dei cediy 
figures; now the same man does the same work in less 
jigaz; nau da seim mien dAZ da seim wa:k in les 
than three hours with his machine. That means more 
dan pri: auaz wid hiz ma'fim . 6xt mimz mo: 
than five hours saved every day.” Storm was shown 
dan faiv auaz seivd evri dei” sio:m waz foun 
347 
Chapter Thirty-Eight (38). 
a conversation = 
a talk between 
two or more 
persons 
dinm’-jaeket 
some other modern things that are useful in an office, 
s\m \3d modon piyz dot a: ju:sful in on ojis , 
and then they went back to the manager’s private 
dnd den dei went bwk id dd mwnidpz praivit 
office. After Storm had told the manager what they 
of is. a: ftd sh:m hdd tonld dd mtenidp hwot dei 
had seen and done during their stay in England, Mr. 
hdd si:n dnd d\n djuoriy deo stei in iyglond, mistor 
Edwards said, “I know what it is like to be in a for- 
edwddz sed , "ai nou hwot it iz laik td bi: in o \o- 
eign country as a tourist. You do not get into con- 
rin k\ntri dz d tudrist. ju: du: not get into kon- 
versation with Englishmen as much as you would like 
vo'seif on wid iyglifmon oz m\if oz ju: wild taik 
to. So if you would like to come and dine with us to¬ 
fu. sou if ju: wud laik to k\m ond dain wid as to¬ 
night , all four of you, my wife and I would be very 
nait, o:l fo:r ov jumai waif ond ai wud bi: veri 
pleased. Could you come at half past seven?” “Thank 
pli:zd. kud ju: kAm ot ha:f pa:st sevn?” “pwyk 
you very much, that is very kind of you!” Storm 
ju: veri mAtf , dvet iz veri kaind ov ju:!” sto:m 
answered, “but I am afraid that we have not brought 
a:nsod , “5a/ ai om o freid dot wi: hov not bro:t 
the right clothes for that. We took as little luggage 
do rait kloudz fo diet, wi: tuk oz litl lAgidj 
as possible, and none of us have brought our dinner- 
oz posobl , ond nAn ov as hov bro:t auo dino- 
348 
The Thirty-Eighth (38th) Chapter. 
jackets. We didn’t expect an invitation to dinner, you 
dfiekils. wi: didnt iks'pekt an inviteifan to dina , ja: 
know.” At this reply Mr. Edwards laughed, saying, 
non." dt bis ri'plai mistar edwddz la:ft , seiiy, 
“My dear boy, what a funny idea that it would be 
“mai did boi, hwot 9 f\ni ai'dia ddt it wud bi: 
necessary for you to wear a dinner-jacket! I am 
nesisdri fd fu: td wear a dinadjxkit! ai am 
afraid that it is an idea that many foreigners have. I 
a'freid bat it iz an ai'dia bat meni forinaz haev. ai 
know that some English writers give that impression 
nou bat s\m iyglif raitaz giv baet im'prejan 
in their books. Kipling, for example, gives the im- 
in bea buks. kipliy , far ig'za:mpl, givz bi im¬ 
pression that Englishmen wear dinner-jackets for 
'prefan bat iyglifman wea dinad^xkits fa 
dinner every evening. But this may only be said of 
dina evri i:vniy. b\t bis mei ounli bi: sed av 
some people of the upper classes. The Englishman of 
s\m pi:pl av bi \pa kla.siz. bi iyglifman av 
the middle classes wears his usual clothes for dinner, 
ba midi kia.siz weaz hiz ju:$ual kloubz fa dina , 
and he is not so much interested in the clothes that 
and hi: iz not sou m\tf intristid in ba kloubz bat 
people wear as in the people wearing them. Speaking 
pi:pl wea az in ba pi:pl weariy bam. spi:kiy 
necessary = which 
must be done 
He wears, he wore, 
he has worn 
Iwezz, wo:, wo:n\. 
upper = higher 
for myself, it has not been necessary for me to wear 
fa mai'self, it haz not bi:n nesisari fa mi: ta wear 
349 
Chapter Thirty-Eight (38). 
a dinner-jacket for six months, and the last time I 
a dinad^rkit fa siks m\nps y and da la:st taim ai 
wore mine it was only because it was necessary to 
wo: main it waz ounli bi'koz it waz nesisari ta 
give it some fresh air. May we expect you to dinner, 
giv it s\m fref ea . mei wi: iks'pekt ju: ta dina , 
then?” Storm: '‘Yes, thank you, we shall be very pleased 
den?” sto:m: “ jes , pxyk juwi: fal bi: veri pli:zd 
to come.” 
ta k\m” 
When Storm told his friends about the invitation, 
hwen sto:m tould hiz frendz abaut 8i invi'teifan , 
they were all very pleased at the chance of speaking 
dei wa:r o:l veri pli:zd at da tfa.ns av spi:kiy 
to an Englishman and his family in their home. They 
tu an iyglifman and hiz f&mili in dea houm. dei 
arrived at Mr. Edwards’s a little before 7.30 and 
a'raivd atmistar edwadziz a litl bi'fo: sevn pa:ti and 
were shown into the sitting-room. They found Mr. 
wa: foun inta da sitiyrum. dei faund mistar 
Edwards with his wife, and he introduced Storm to 
edwadz wid hiz waif , and hi: intradju:st sto:m ta 
his wife with the words, “My dear, may I introduce 
hiz waif wid da wa:dz , “mai dia , mei ai intradju:s 
Mr. Storm to you? Mr. Storm, this is my wife.” Storm 
mistasto:m ta ju:? mista sto:m , dis iz mai waif” sto:m 
greeted her, saying, “How do you do, Mrs. Edwards,” 
gri.tid haseiirj , “haudju'du:, misiz edwadz” 
350 
The Thirty-Eighth (38th) Chapter. 
and then he introduced his friends, “This is Mr. Miller, 
dnd den hi: intro'dju:st hiz frcndz , “Sis iz mistd mite , 
our teacher, and these are my two friends, Mr. Wood 
auo ti:tfd , and di:z a: mai tu: frendz , mistd wud 
and Mr. Brown/' 
dnd mistd braun .” 
Mr. Miller thanked Mr. and Mrs. Edwards for their 
mistd mite pivgkt mister dnd misiz edwddz fd bed 
kindness in asking three strangers — three men whom 
kaindnis in a:skiij pri: streindpz — pri: men hu:m 
they did not know — to dinner. After a glass of wine 
Sei did not non — to dino. a:ftor o gla:s ov wain 
Mr. Edwards said to Mr. Miller, Brown, and Wood, 
mister edwodz sed to mistd mite , braun , and wud , 
“May Mr. Storm and I leave you for a few minutes? 
“mci mistd sto:m and ai li:v ju: for a fju: minits? 
There is something I want to speak to Mr. Storm 
deor iz s\mphj ai wont to spi:k to mistd stem 
about before dinner. — Will you fill the gentlemen’s 
o'baul bijo: dino. — wit ju: fit bo d$entlmonz 
glasses again, my dear,” he said to his wife, “while 
{jla:siz o'gcin, mai did ” hi: sed to hiz waif 9 “hwail 
Mr. Storm and I go into my study?” 
miste stem ond ai gou into mai stAdi?” 
Mr. Edwards’s study was a nice large room with book- 
mistor cdwodziz st\di woz o nais la:d$ rum wib buk- 
shelves along two walls, a fire-place, in front of which 
felvz o'loy tu: wo:lz , a jaiopleis , in fr\nt ov hwitf 
one shelf 
two shelves 
351 
Chapter Thirty-Eight (38). 
writing-lable 
there were some big chairs, and a large writing-table 
deo wo: s\m big tfedz, ond o la:dj raitiyteibl 
with many papers and books. Over the fire-place was 
wid meni pcipdz dnd buks. ouvd do faiopleis woz 
a shelf, on which there was a fine old clock. “Sit down 
d Jclfy on hwitf ded Wdz d fain ould klok . "sit daun 
in that chair, Storm,” said Mr. Edwards, “I will take 
in diet tfed , sto:msed mistdr edwddz , il ai wil teik 
this one.” He then began, “How would you like to 
dis w\n” hi: den bi'gsen, “hau wud ju: laik id 
stay on = stay 
stay on here a few months longer, Storm? You see, 
stei on hior o fju: m\nps log go, sto:m? ju: si:, 
to be taken ill = 
to become ill 
one of my young men at the office was taken ill last 
w\n ov mai jxg men ot di ofis woz teikn il la:st 
week, and he will not be able to start work again 
wi:k y ond hi: wil not bi: eibl to sia:t wo:k o'gein 
until the beginning of next year. He has been doing 
\n'til do bi'ginig ov nekst jio. hi: hoz bi:n du:iy 
all our foreign correspondence; most of it is with 
o:l auo forin koris'pondons; moust ov it iz wid 
your country, you know. He writes your language 
jo: k\ntri , ju: non. hi: raits jo: Ueygwidj 
quite well and knows something of several other 
kwait wet ond nouz sxmpig ov scvrol \do 
languages besides. I might get another young man 
Lvygwidjiz bisaidz. ai mait get o l n\do j\g mien 
to take his position, but it may be difficult, as it is 
to teik hiz po'zifon , b\t it mei bi: difikolt , oz it iz 
352 
The Thirty-Eighth (38th) Chapter. 
only for six months. You see, I told him that he could 
ounli fd siks m\nps. ju: si:, ai toald him dot hi: kud 
have his position back when he is well again. But tell 
hxv hiz pd'zifdn bxk hwen hi: iz wel o'gein. b\t tel 
me now what work you are used to, and whether you 
mi: nau hwot W9:k ju: a: ju:st tu, ond hwedo ju: 
think you would be able to fill the position.” Storm 
piyk ju: wud bi: eibl td fil do pd'zifdn .” sto:m 
told him then that he was quite used to business 
tould him den ddt hi: wdz kwait ju:st id biznis 
correspondence; he had written all the letters for his 
koris'ponddns; hi: hdd riin o:l dd letdz fd hiz 
manager for some time, and he was used to all office 
mxnidp fd s\m taim, dnd hi: wdz ju:st tu o:l ofis 
work. “I should like very much to stay on over here, 
wo:k. “ai fud laik veri m\tf td stei on ouud hid, 
but don’t you think it will be difficult for my manager 
b\t dount ju: piyk it wit bi: difikdlt fd mai mzenidp 
to find somebody to fill my position so suddenly? 
td faind s\mbodi td fil mai pd'zifdn sou s\dnli? 
somebody = some 
one 
What will he say to it? It is for him to decide.” 
hwot wit hi: sei tu it? it iz fd him td di'said” 
“I will send him a telegram and ask him about it. 
“ai wit send him d teligrxm dnd a:sk him o'baut it . 
If he sends a quick reply by telegram, which is so 
if hi: sendz d kwik ri'plai bai teligrxm, hwitf iz sou 
much quicker than a letter, the whole thing can be 
m\tf kwikd don o leto, do houl pig kon bi: 
353 
Chapter Thirty-Eight (38). 
decided in a day or two.” 
di'saidid in d dei o: tu 
When they had finished their conversation, they went 
hwen dei hdd finift ded konvd'seifdn, dei went 
in to have dinner with the others. 
in Id hxv dind wid di \ddz. 
WORDS: 
branch 
useful 
stay 
conversation 
pay a visit 
expect 
machine 
save 
dinner-jacket 
writer 
wear 
wore 
worn 
upper classes 
middle classes 
introduce 
kindness 
stranger 
fill 
study 
shelf 
book-shelf 
EXERCISE A. 
Storm went to pay a — to the London — of his firm. 
The manager had — him for some days. He showed 
Storm some modern — which he had bought. One of 
them was an — machine. The manager said that the 
machines — much time. Some English — give the 
impression that Englishmen wear — for dinner every 
day. Most of the English, however, are more interested 
in people themselves than in the clothes they —. 
When the four travellers got to the manager’s house, 
he — Storm to his wife. He and Storm went to his — 
to talk together. Did Storm think that he could fill 
the —? Yes, he said that he was used to business —. 
Why sire adding machines so —? Because they — so 
much time. 
EXERCISE B. 
Where had Storm’s manager asked him to go? . . . Why 
had Mr. Edwards expected Storm? . . . What did he 
show him in his office? . . . Had any of the four men 
brought their dinner-jackets along? ... Do the English 
usually wear dinner-jackets for dinner? . . . Into which 
room did Mr. Edwards and Storm go to talk together? 
. . . What was over the fire-place in Mr. Edwards’s 
354 
The Thirty-Eighth (38th) Chapter. 
study? . . . Did Storm think that he would be able to 
fill the position? . . . What did they send to Storm's 
manager to ask if Storm might take the position? . . . 
Why didn't Mr. Edwards get another Englishman to 
fill the position? .. . 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with 'am, is, are, 
was, were, has been, have been, had been’ and 
verbs in -ing. 
Is John coming home for dinner now? Answer.. . 
Question...? Yes, I am going to town next week. 
Are the four travellers having a good time in Eng¬ 
land? Answer ... Question ...? Yes, they are thinking 
of a trip up the Thames. Was Mr. Edwards expecting 
Storm when he visited his office? Answer . . . Question 
. . .? Yes, the business people were leaving their 
offices when our four travellers arrived in London. 
Were Mr. Miller and the three young men standing 
on deck when the steamer started on the trip to Eng¬ 
land? Answer . . . Question . . .? Yes, Mr. Miller, 
Storm, and Wood were waiting at the railway station 
when Brown arrived. Has Wood been working at the 
office for a year? Answer . . . Question . . .? No, the 
three friends have not been studying English for so 
very long. Had John been skating on the lake in the 
afternoon? Answer . . . Question . . .? Yes, Helen had 
been learning to swim all the summer. Had the young 
men been planning their trip to England for a long 
time? Answer . . . Question . . .? Yes, this time Mrs. 
Miller had been staying at the farm all the time her 
husband was in England. 
fire-place 
writing-table 
correspondence 
position 
somebody 
quick 
telegram 
interest (verb) 
reply 
necessary 
over 
round 
adding machine 
355 
Chapter Thirty-Nine (39). 
The Thirty-Ninth (39th) Chapter. 
common 
AN ENGLISH HOUSE 
When dinner was over, Mr. Edwards offered to show 
hwen dino wdz ouvd , mistor edwddz ofdd td foil 
his guests the house. “You haven’t seen the inside of 
hiz gests dd haus. “ju: hxvnt si:n di insaid dv 
an English home, have you?” he asked them. “Perhaps 
9n iyglif houm , hxv ju:?” hi: a:skt 69 m. “po'hieps 
it might interest you to see ours. It is a little larger 
it mait intrist ju: to si: auoz. it iz 0 litl la:dp 
than what we might call 'the typical English house’. 
don hwot wi: mait ko:l ‘do tipikol iyglif haus\ 
The typical English house, I should say, has five rooms. 
do tipikol iyglif haus , ai fud sei , hwz faiv ru:mz. 
Four fifths (4/5) of all the small houses that you have 
fo: jifps ov o:l do smo:l hauziz dot ju: hov 
seen on your trips about London have been of that 
si:n on jo: trips obaut l\ndon hov bi:n ov diet 
type, and it is not only in London that this type is 
taip t ond it iz not ounli in l\ndon dot dis taip iz 
usual 
common, but all over England. 
komon , b\t o:l ouvor iyglond. 
“Now, we have three rooms on the ground floor. You 
“nau 9 wi: hiev pri: ru:mz on do graund jlo:. ju: 
have seen two of them, and I will show you the study 
hov si:n tu: ov dom 9 ond ai wit fou ju: do stxdi 
356 
The Thirty-Ninth (39th) Chapter. 
now,” he added, opening the door to his study. ' This 
flaw,” hi: ivdid , ouponiij do do: to hiz si\di. “dis 
is my room, where I can have my books and papers 
iz mai ru:m , hweor ai kon hveo mai buks ond peipoz 
in peace. The maid comes in here about once a week 
in pi:s. do meid k\mz in hio o'baut w\ns o wi:k 
to clean the room, and on that day I can never find 
to kli:n do ru:m , ond on diet dei ai kon novo faind 
any of my things. She has been here to-day, I think, 
eni ou mai piyz. fi: hoz bi:n hio to'dei, ai piijk , 
for I can’t see my cigars anywhere. Well, they must 
for ai ka:nt si: mai si'ga:z enihweo. wel , dei m\st 
be somewhere, so I’ll see if I can find them.” He 
bi: s\mhwed , sou ail si: if ai kon faind dom .” hi: 
looked round the room, found the box of cigars at last 
lukt raund do ru:m , faund do boks ov si'ga:z ot la:st 
on one of the book-shelves, and then offered one to 
on w\n oo do bukfelvz , ond den ofod w\n til 
each of his guests. 
i:lf ov hiz gcsts. 
“These arm-chairs in front of the fire-place look very 
“di:z a:mtfeoz in fr\nt oo do faiopleis luk oeri 
comfortable,” said Wood, and Mr. Edwards replied, 
kxmfotoblsed wud , ond mistor edwodz ri'plaid, 
“Yes, they are very nice to sit in. I have tried to 
“/cs, dei a: oeri nais to sit in. ai hoo traid to 
make my house as comfortable as possible, for it is so 
meik mai ham oz k\mfotobl oz posobU /ar it iz sou 
arm-cfour 
357 
Chapter Thirty-Nine (39). 
to cook = to 
make food ready 
for eating 
the ground floor = 
the floor nearest 
to the ground 
nice, when you come home after a long day’s work, to 
nais, hwen ju: k\m houm a:ftar a log deiz wa:k , la 
sit in a big, comfortable chair, reading the paper or 
sit in a big , k\mfatabl tfea, ri.dig da peipa a:r 
a good book. But come along and see the other rooms 
a gud buk. b\t k\m a'log and si: di \da ru:mz 
of the house. The kitchen, where the food is cooked, 
av da haus. da kit Jin, hwea da ju:d iz kukt , 
is not very interesting to men; it is here at the back 
iz not veri intristig to men; it iz hia at da bwk 
of the house; but next to the kitchen is a small room 
av da haus; b\t nekst ta da kit fin iz a smo:t ru:m 
which is typical of an English house. It is called the 
hwitf iz tipikal av an igglif haus. it iz ko:ld da 
scullery, and it is used for the washing up and for the 
sk \iari, and it iz ju:zd fa da wo Jig a p and la da 
dirty part of the cooking, such as cleaning potatoes 
da:ti pa:t av da kukig , s\tj az klimig pateitouz 
and vegetables.” After having shown them the ground 
and vedjitablz .” a:fta hivvig foun dam da graund 
floor, Mr. Edwards took them upstairs to the first 
/to:, mistar edwadz tuk dam 'a p'steaz ta da fa:st 
floor. “Upstairs we have all the bedrooms and the 
flo:. “'a p'steaz ivi: luvv o:l da bedrumz and da 
bathroom. This big one is our own room; here is one 
ba.prum. dis big w\n iz auar oun ru:m; hiar iz w\n 
for the maid, and this is my daughter’s room. She is 
fa da meid , and dis iz mai do:taz ru:m. Ji: iz 
358 
The Thirty-Ninth (39th) Chapter. 
not at home to-night; these young people are never 
not at houm td'nait; di:z j\?j pi:pl a: nevdr 
at home! She has gone out with some friends to see 
at houm! Ji: hoz gon ant wid s\m frendz id si: 
a picture. That room used to be my son’s, but he is 
d piktfd. dxt ru:m ju:st id bi: mai s\nz , b\t hi: iz 
now married to the daughter of an old friend of mine 
nau maerid Id da do:tdr dv drt ould frend ov main 
and has his own home. It is nice to have an extra 
dnd haez hiz oun houm. it iz nais td hasv an ekstra 
room. Since my son married two years ago, we have 
ru:m. sins mai sah mserid tu: jiaz agou , wi: hav 
often used the room for guests. Well, shall we go 
o:fn ju:zd 5a ru:m fa gests. wel , fal wi: gou 
downstairs again? I think you have seen all there is 
daun'steaz agein? ai piyk ju: hav si:n o:l dear iz 
to be seen upstairs and downstairs now. Perhaps you 
ta bi: si:n a p'steaz and ' daun'steaz nau. pa'hasps ju: 
would like to see the garden, too. You know that, like 
wud laik ta si: 6a ga:dn , tu:. ju: nou dot , laik 
most Englishmen, I love my garden. I love to work to love = to like 
moust iyglifman, ai Iav mai ga:dn. ai Iav ta wa:k very much 
in it in the evening after sitting in the office most of 
in it in di i:unig a:fta sitiy in di of is moust av 
the day. On Sunday mornings I get a lot of work done 
da dei. on s\ndi mo.niyz ai get a lot av wa:k dAn 
in the garden. I am hardly ever ill, and I think it 
in da ga:dn. ai am ha:dli evar il , and ai piyk it 
359 
Chapter Thirty-Nine (39). 
rose 
is my love of garden work that does this. Work like 
iz mai l\v dv ga:dn wd:k 5dt d\z Sis. Wd:k laik 
this is necessary for a business man to keep him well. 
dis iz nesisdri fdv d biznis moon id ki:p him wel. 
I am especially interested in roses. Over here on the 
ai dm is'pefdli inlristid t in rouziz. ouvd hid on dd 
lawns 
south side of the house and along the garden wall, I 
saup said dv dd haus dnd d'loy do ga:dn wo:l, ai 
have my rose-bushes. Aren’t they beauties? 
hcev mai rouzbufiz. a:nt dei bju:tiz? 
“You see that we have a big lawn. Most English people 
“ju: si: ddt wi: hcev d big lo:n. moust iyglif pi:pl 
like to have a piece of ground with grass in their 
laik id hcev d pi:s dv graund wid gra:s in ded 
gardens. As you can see, the lawn goes right up to the 
ga.dnz . dz ju: kon si:, dd lo:n gouz rail a p id dd 
house, so that looking out of the windows, we almost 
haus, sou ddt lukhj aut dv dd windouz, wi:o:lmoust 
feel that we are in the garden. The lawns of many 
fid ddt wi: a:r in do ga:dn. dd lo:nz dv meni 
large old English country-houses are famous all over 
la:dj ould iyglif k\ntrihauziz a: jeimds o:l ouvo 
the world. These old lawns are so famous and well 
dd wddd . di:z ould lo:nz a: sou feimos dnd wel 
known that, when people want to say that a lawn is 
noun ddt, hwen pi:pl wont to sei dot o lo:n iz 
really beautiful, they say it is a 'real English lawn’. 
rioli bjiiddful, dei sei it iz o ‘ridl iyglif lo:n\ 
360 
The Thirty-Ninth (39th) Chapter. 
Some of them are several hundred years old. 
s\m av dam a: sevral hAndrad jiaz oald. 
“At the back of the garden are my fruit trees, and we 
“at da bxk av da ga:dn a: mai fru:t tri:z , and wi: 
also have a small kitchen-garden with a few vegetables. 
o.'lsouhxv a smo:l kitfinga.dn wid a fju: vedjitablz . 
It isn’t of very much use to us, but I get lots of fun 
it iznt av vcri m\tf ju:s til as, b\t ai get lots av f\n 
out of working in it.” On their way back to the house 
aut av wa:ki?) in it.” on dea wei bxk to da haus 
Mr. Edwards showed them the garage and opened the 
mistar edwadz fond dam da gxra:$ and oupand da 
mzm 
& 
door so that they might see his car. It was a beauty, 
do: sou dat dei mail si: hiz ka:. it waz a bju:ti, 
and quite new. “It is a small Morris,” he said. "I 
and kwait nju:. “it iz a smo:l moris ” hi: sed. “ai 
think you know Morris cars in your country, too. It 
piyk ju: noil moris ka:z in jo: kxntri , tu:. it 
is quite famous in other countries for its low price and 
iz kwait feimos in a da kAnlriz jar its lou prais and 
for being cheap to run. I have had other cars before, 
fa bi:iy tfi:p ta rAn . ai hav hxd Ada ka:z bi'jo:, 
to run (here) = 
to drive 
larger ones, but now that we are only three, this one 
la:dp WAnz , bAt nau dat wi: a:r ounli pri: t dis wAn 
is big enough, and, nowadays, cheapness is something 
iz big i '/ ia /, and , nauadeiz , tfi.pnis iz sAmpiy 
one must think of, too. It runs many miles for a few 
WAn mAst piyk ov , tu:. it rAnz meni mailz far a fju: 
361 
Chapter Thirty-Nine (39). 
shillings.” There was a door from the garage into the 
filiyz .” deo woz o do: from do g<era:$ into do 
hall, and they returned to the house by this door. Miss 
ho:l t 2 nd dei rito:nd to do haiis bai dis do:, mis 
Edwards had now returned and was introduced to the 
edwodz hod nan rilo.nd ond woz intro'dju:st to do 
guests by her father, who said, “This is my daughter 
gests bai ho: fa:do , hu: sed , “dis iz mai do:to 
Marion. Marion, this is Mr. Miller, who is staying in 
mierion. moerion , dis iz misto milo , hu: i : steiiy in 
England with his pupils, Mr. Storm, Mr. Wood, and 
iyglond wid hiz pju:plz , misto sto:m f misto wud , ond 
Mr. Brown.” Miss Edwards was a lovely young girl, 
misto braun .” mis edwodz woz o Iwli j\y god , 
rosy = like a rose a typical English beauty, with a rosy face, blue eyes, 
o tipikol iyglif bju.ti, wid o rouzi feis , blu: aiz> 
wavy hair = hair and brown, wavy hair. They sat for some hours talking 
with u/aupc in it 41 " 
ond braun , weivi heo. dei stet fo s\m auoz io:kiy 
in front of the fire in the study. Mr. Edwards was able 
in fr\nt ov do faior in do stxdi. misior edwodz woz eibl 
to tell them about many interesting things in London, 
to tel dom o'baut meni intristiy piyz in l\ndon , 
which he said they must see before leaving, and when 
hwitf hi: sed dei m\st si: bi'fo: li:viy f ond hwen 
at last it was time for them to take their leave, they 
ot la:st it woz taim fo dom to teik deo li:v , dei 
all thanked Mr. and Mrs. Edwards as well as Miss 
o:l pceykt mistor ond misiz edwodz oz wet oz mis 
362 
The Thirty-Ninth (39th) Chapter. 
Edwards for the pleasant evening they had spent in 
edwadz fa da pleznt i:vnirj dei had spent in 
their home. They said that they would never forget 
dea houm. dei sed dat dei wild neva fa'get 
the kindness that had been shown them‘when they 
da kciindnis dat had bi:n foun dam hwen dei 
came as strangers to their home, and they added that 
keim az streindpz ta dea houm , and dei xdid dat 
they would write them a letter when they got back 
dei wild rait dam a leta hwen dei got bxk 
to their own country. 
ta dear oun kxntri. 
EXERCISE A. 
Mr. Edwards said that the — English house has five 
rooms. He could not find his cigars —, because the 
maid had just been in to — his room. At last he found 
them on one of the —. Mr. Edwards liked a — chair 
to sit in when he came home from his office work. The 
food is — in the —, but the washing up is done in 
the —. Mr. and Mrs. Edwards had a son who was — 
to the daughter of an old friend of theirs. The daughter 
was not at home; she had gone to see a — with some 
friends. She returned later and was — to the guests 
by her father. 
In the garden was a big — with beautiful grass. There 
were also many beautiful flowers, especially —. Mr. 
Edwards called his rose-bushes—. After they had seen 
the garden, they went to the — and had a look at Mr. 
Edwards’s car. He said that it was famous for its low 
WORDS: 
offer 
inside 
typical 
type 
clean 
anywhere 
arm-chair 
comfortable 
cook 
cooking 
scullery 
washing up 
upstairs 
downstairs 
married 
363 
Chapter Thirty-Nine (39). 
marry 
love 
love (verb) 
rose 
rose-bush 
rosy 
beauty 
lawn 
famous 
fun 
ground 
garage 
car 
run 
cheapness 
wavy 
common 
leave 
Miss 
price and for being — to run, not only in England, 
but also in other countries. When at last they took 
their —, they thanked Mr. and Mrs. Edwards for the 
— evening. 
EXERCISE B. 
How many rooms did the Edwards family have down¬ 
stairs, and how many upstairs? . . . How many times 
a week did the maid get into the study to clean the 
room? . . . What did Mr. Edwards offer his guests after 
he had shown them his study? . . . What is the scullery 
used for in a typical English house? . . . What did Mr. 
and Mrs. Edwards use the extra room for after their son 
had married? . . . What good did Mr. Edwards get out 
of his love of garden work? . . . Where did he have his 
roses? . . . Where were the fruit trees to be found? . . . 
Why did the family have such a small car now? . . . 
How did Mr. Edwards introduce his daughter to the 
guests? . . . 
fifth 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with 'am, is, are, 
was, were, has been, have been, had been, will be’ and 
verbs in -ed, etc. 
Is Mr. Edwards’s study cleaned every day? Answer . . . 
Question . . .? Yes, I am often invited to my manager’s 
home for dinner. Were the guests introduced to Mrs. 
Edwards? Answer . . . Question . . .? Yes, all the rooms 
in the house were shown to the guests. Are the lawns 
of English country-houses known all over the world? 
Answer . . . Question . . .? Yes, money for hospital 
364 
The Thirty-Ninth (39th) Chapter. 
work is collected on special days. Was Storm greeted 
kindly by Mr. Edwards when he paid him a visit at 
his office? Answer . . . Question . . .? No, his friends 
were also invited to dinner at Mr. Edwards’s house. 
Was William called the Conqueror before or after he 
came to England? Answer . . . Question . . .? Yes, 
Egbert became king of all England. Has England been 
conquered by any nation since the Battle of Hastings? 
Answer . . . Question . . .? No, the two other young 
men have not been asked to stay in England for another 
six months. Had the travellers been shown the inside 
of an English home before they were invited to dinner 
at Mr. and Mrs. Edwards’s? Answer . . . Question . . .? 
No, cigars had not been offered to the guests before 
they entered the study. Will Storm be allowed by 
his manager to stay in England for another six months, 
do you think? Answer . . . Question . . .? Yes, the 
question about his stay will be decided very quickly, I 
think. 
365 
Chapter Forty (40). 
The Fortieth (40th) Chapter. 
method = the 
to do things 
THE DEPARTURE 
The next few days Storm woke up every morning 
do nekst fju: deiz sto:m wouk a p evri momiy 
expecting a telephone call from Mr. Edwards, and at 
ikspektiy o tclifoun ko:l from mistdr edwodz, and ot 
last, when Storm had almost given up hope, Mr. Ed- 
la:st, hwcn sto:m hdd odmoust givn a p houp , mistdr ed- 
wards called him on the telephone, “Hallo, this is 
Wddz ko:ld him on do telifoun , “ ho'lou , dis iz 
Edwards speaking. Is Mr. Storm there?” 
edwodz spi:kiy. iz misto sto:m deo?” 
“Just a minute, Mr. Edwards, and I will call him to 
“d$Ast o minit , mistor edwodz , ond ai wil ko:l him to 
the telephone,” replied Brown, who had answered the 
do telifoun ,” ri'plaid braun, hu: hod a:nsod do 
telephone. Storm came to the telephone and was told 
telifoun. sh:m keim to do telifoun ond woz tould 
some very good news. His manager had thought it was 
sxm veri gud nju:z. hiz mienidp hod pod it woz 
a good idea and was very pleased that one of his young 
o gud ai'dio ond woz veri pli:zd dot w\n ov hiz 
men should have this chance of studying English 
men fud hxv dis tfa:ns ov stxdiiy ^V9^f 
way 
business methods. It would be very useful for the firm 
biznis mepodz. it wud bi: veri ju:sful fo do fo:m 
366 
The Fortieth (40th) Chapter. 
to have a man whose knowledge of English was good, 
to hxv o mien hu:z nolid j ov iyglif woz gad , 
and who also had some knowledge of the English 
ond hu: o:lsou hoed s\m nolid$ ov di iyglif 
method of doing business. 
mepod ov du:iy biznis. 
During the last two or three days they were in London. 
djuoriy do la:st fu: o: pri: deiz iei wo:r in l\ndon, 
they were very busy, because there was not much time 
dei wo: vcri bizi y bi'koz deo woz not mxtf taim 
before their departure, and there were so many things 
bifo: deo di'pa.tjo , ond deo wo: sou meni piyz 
they wanted to see before they left. On the tfery last 
dei wontid to si: bifo: dei left, on do veri la:st 
day, they went out to buy some small presents for 
dei , dei went aut to bai s\m smo:l preznts fo 
their relations and friends at home. Wood had promised 
deo ri'leifonz ond frendz ot houm. wud hod promist 
his sister to bring something nice home for her. He 
hiz sisto to brig s\mpiy nais houm fo: ho:, hi: 
had not forgotten his promise, but as he was not used 
hod not fo'gotn hiz promis 9 b\t oz hi: woz not ju:st 
to buying presents for young ladies, the other three went 
to baiiy preznts fo f\y leidiz, di Ado pri: went 
along with him to help him. They knew Selfridge’s, 
o'log wid him to help him. dei nfu: selfridjiz, 
where they had bought sticks, handkerchiefs, and 
hweo dei hod bo:t stiks , hxykotfifs , ond 
knowledge = that 
which a man 
knows 
departure = going 
away 
relations 
Father, mother, 
sisters, brothers, 
uncles, aunts, etc., 
are relations. 
367 
Chapter Forty (40). 
a saleswoman = a 
woman who sells 
things at a shop 
cigarettes, so they went there again. In the part of the 
sigd'rets , sou iei went ieor o'gein. in id pad dv id 
shop where women’s things are sold, they looked at 
fop hwed wiminz pigz a: soutd, iei lukt dt 
all sorts of articles, but could not decide what to buy. 
,9.7 sods ov adiktz , b\t kud not disaid hwot to bai. 
At last they asked one of the young ladies to help them. 
dt Ia:st iei a:skt w\n dv id jleidiz td help idm. 
She first asked what sort of things the young lady 
fi: fd:st a:skt hwot sod ov piyz id j\y leidi 
would be interested in. “Oh, something to wear, I 
wud bi: intristid in . “ou, s\mpig to wed , ai 
should think,” said Wood. “What size clothes does she 
fud piyksed wud. “hwot saiz k'louiz d\z fi: 
take?” Wood had no idea of the *size of his sister’s 
/eiTc?” wud heed nou ai'dio ov id saiz ov hiz sistoz 
clothes. “Well, perhaps you can tell me whether the 
klouiz. “ wel, po'heeps ju: kon tel mi: hweio id 
young lady is big or small, then,” said the saleswoman. 
j\y leidi iz big o: smod , ien," sed id seilzwumon. 
“She is neither big nor small; she is just like most 
t€ fi: iz naiid big no: smod; fi: iz d$\st laik moust 
other girls.” That did not help very much to give the 
a id godz .” iect did not help veri m\tf to giv id 
saleswoman an idea of Miss Wood’s size, so she said, 
seilzwumon on ai'dio ov mis wudz saiz , sou fi: sed , 
“I don’t think that you should buy clothes for her, if 
“aidount piyk iot ju: fud bai klouiz jo: ho:, if 
368 
The Fortieth (40th) Chapter. 
you don’t know the size. She wouldn’t be pleased if 
ju: douni non da saiz. fi: wudnt bi: pli.zd if 
you bought something which was either too small or 
ju: bo:t SAmpiy hwitf Wdz aids tu: smo:l o: 
too big for her, because then she would not be able 
tu: big fo: ha:, bi'koz den fi: wad not bi: eibl 
to wear it. But we have many other things, hand- 
ta wear it. b\t wi: hxv meni Ada pirjz , hxnd - 
bags, for example. We have some very fine leather 
bxgz, far ig'za:mpi wi: haw SAm veri fain leda 
bags here.” “What sort of leather is this?” Wood 
bxgz hia." “hwot. so:t av ledar iz bis?” wud 
asked, when he was shown the bags. “It is goatskin,” 
a:skt , hwen hi: waz foun da bxgz. “it iz goutskin ,” 
the saleswoman answered; “the bags cost only forty 
da seilzwuman a:nsad; “da bxgz kost ounli fo:ti 
shillings apiece.” 
filiyz a'pi.s” 
“That is quite cheap,” Wood said to the others. “At 
“dxt iz kwait tfi:pwild sed ta di a daz. “at 
home we shouldn’t be able to get bags of goatskin as 
houm wi: fudnt bi: eibl ta get bxgz av goutskin az 
cheap as that. Goatskin is a very fine sort of leather 
tfi:p az dxt. goutskin iz a veri fain so:t av leda 
and is usually very expensive. I once bought a bag 
and iz ju:$uali veri iks'pensiv . ai WAns bo:t a bseg 
for an aunt or some other relation at home, and that 
far an a:nt o: SAm Ada ri'leifan at houm , and dxt 
goatskin = the 
skin of goats 
apiece = for each 
369 
Chapter Forty (40). 
to take leave of = 
to say good-bye to 
fare = price of 
ticket 
was much more expensive. Bags of this sort would 
waz mxtf mo:r iks'pensiv. baegz av dis so:t wild 
cost at least sixty shillings apiece. I think I will take 
kost at li:st siksli filigz api:s. ai piyk ai wil teik 
one of them.” 
wxn av dam .” 
The hour of their departure from England had arrived. 
di auar av dea di'pa:tfa fram iygland had araivd. 
The other three were sorry to take leave of Storm, for 
di a da pri: wa: sori ta ieik li:v av sto:m 9 fa 
they had had such a lovely time together. Wood said 
dei had heed sxtf a Ixvli laim ta'geda. wild sed 
that he was jealous of his friend. “I wish I was the 
dat hi: waz djelas av hiz frend . “ai wif ai waz da 
one to stay over here for another six months,” he said, 
war ta stei oiiva hia far ai\\da siks mxnps ” hi: sed , 
“you seem to be getting all the fun. First, your firm 
“ju: si:m ta bi: getig o:l da f\n. fa:st 9 jo: fa:m 
pays your fare to England, and the ticket from our 
peiz jo: fea tu iygland , and da tikit fram aua 
home town to London is not cheap; and now they let 
houm taun ta txndan iz not tfi:p; and nau dei let 
you stay here for another six months. I wish I 
ju: stei hia far a'nxda siks mxnps. ai wif ai 
worked for a firm that would have paid my fare, then 
wa:kt far a fa:m dat wud hav peid mai fea t den 
I should not have had to think of the ticket!” 
ai fud not hav haed ta pigk av da tikitr 
370 
The Fortieth (40th) Chapter. 
But Storm knew that his friend was not really jealous 
b\t sto:m niu: dat hiz frend waz not rioli djelas 
of him, but only pleased that this chance should have 
ov him , b\t ounli pli:zd dat dis tja:ns Jud hav 
been offered him. Storm went with them to the station 
bi:n of ad him. sh:m went wid dam ta da steifan 
to wish them a pleasant trip back. On the way they 
ta wif dam a pleznt trip boek. on da wei dei 
spoke of all the things they had seen and of the places 
spouk av o:l da piyz dei had si:n and av da pleisiz 
they had not yet been to. 
dei had not jet bi:n tu. 
“You know,” said Mr. Miller, “there are many people 
“ ju: nou” sed mista mila , ,( dear a: meni pi:pl 
who think that when they have seen the capital of a 
hu: pirjk dot hwen dei hav si:n da kaepital av a 
country, they have seen everything the country has to 
kxnlri , dei hav si:n evripig da k\ntri haez ta 
show them. We have visited London, the capital of 
fou dam. wi: hav vizitid l\ndan , da kaepital av 
England, but we must not think that this is the whole 
iygland, b\t wi: m\st not piyk dat dis iz da houl 
of England. There are many other large cities of great 
av iygland. dear a: meni \da la:dy sitiz av greit 
importance in England, such as Birmingham, Sheffield, 
im'po.tans in iygland, s\tf az ba.miyam , fefi:ld 9 
Manchester, and Newcastle. All these towns are very 
maentfista , and nju:ka:sl. o:l di:z taunz a: veri 
371 
Chapter Forty (40). 
important and would be very interesting to visit. You 
im'po:tant and wud bi: veri intristiy ta vizit. ju: 
all know why they are of such great importance?” 
o:l nou hwai iei a:r dv s\tf greit im'po.tans?'* 
“Birmingham and Sheffield are famous for their metal 
“ ba:miyam dnd fefi.ld a: leimas fa ded metl 
articles,” said Wood. “We have some knives at home 
a:tiklz ,” sed wud . “wi: hcev s\m naivz dt houm 
made of Sheffield steel.” 
meid dv fefidd sti:l” 
“Yes,” said Mr. Miller, “steel is a very hard metal, and 
“/es,” sed mistd mild , “sti:l iz d veri ha:d metl, dnd 
the best knives are always made of steel. The best 
dd best naivz a:r o:lwdz meid dv sti:L id best 
trains, machines, bicycles, steamers, etc., are made of 
treinz , md'fimz , baisiklz , sti:mdz , itsetrd , a: meid av 
steel. Sometimes, however, it would be too expensive 
sti:l. s\mtaimz , hau'evd , it wud bi: tu: iks'pensiv 
to use steel to make these things, so iron is used 
id ju:z sti:l ta meik ii:z piyz , sou aian iz ju:zd 
instead. Steel is really iron, but iron that has been 
insied. sti:l iz riali aian, b\C aian iat haz bi:n 
made very hard. That is the reason why steel is more 
meid veri ha:d. ixl iz id ri:zn hwai sti:l iz mo:r 
expensive. 
iks'pensiv . 
“In nearly all English houses there are fire-places. In 
“in niali o:l iyglif hauziz dear a: faiapleisiz. in 
372 
The Fortieth (40th) Chapter. 
winter it is very comfortable to sit in front of the fire. 
wintd it iz veri kAmjotobl to sit in jr\nt dv do faio. 
The English nearly always use coal for their fires. 
di iyglif nioli o:lwdz ju:z koul /a deo fa&z. 
Usually, they have had more than enough coal for their 
ju:$uoli t dci hdv h&d mo: don i'n\f koul jo deor 
own houses, trains, steamers, etc., so that they have been 
oun hauzizy treinz, sti:moz , it'setro , sou dot dei hov bi:n 
able export coal to other countries. Newcastle is a 
eibl tu eks'pod koul tu \do kxntriz. nju:ka:sl iz a 
very important coal town, from which much coal has 
veri impo.tont koul taun , from hwitf m\tf koul hoz 
been exported to foreign countries. Newcastle, however, 
bi:n ekspo.tid to forin k\ntriz. nju:ka:sl , hatievo, 
is also a very important town for the building of ships. 
izodsouo veri im po.tont taun jo 5o bildiy ov Jips . 
Manchester, as you will all remember, is famous for 
meenlfislo , oz ju: wil o:l ri'membo , iz jeimos for 
its cotton articles, and many things made of cotton are 
its kotn a:tiklz , ond meni piyz meid ov kotn a:r 
exported to the whole world. In our shops at home it 
eks'po:tid to do houl wo:ld . in auo fops ot houm it 
is also possible to buy cotton articles made in Man- 
iz o:lsou posobl to bai kotn a:tiklz meid in mren- 
chester. You will all understand, then, that there is 
tfisto . ju: wil o:l a ndo'stxnd, den , dot deor iz 
much more to be seen in England. But we have been 
m\tf mo: to bi: si:n in iyglond. b\t wi: hov bi:n 
to export = to sell 
to a foreign coun¬ 
try 
373 
Chapter Forty (40). 
to remember (here) 
= to mention 
busy every second of our visit, and I think it is the 
bizi evri sekond ov auo vizit , dnd ai pigk it iz do 
hope of all of us to be able to return to England some 
houp ov o:l ov as td bi: cibl Id ritom tv hjglond s\m 
other time. Now I see that it is time for the train 
Add taim. nau ai si: dot it iz taim fd dd trein 
to start, so we shall have to say good-bye to Storm.” 
td sta:U sou wi: fdl hsev td sei gud'bai td sto:m." 
They shouted together, “Good-bye, Sturm!” 
dei fautid to'gedo ,' “'gud'bai, sto:m!” 
Storm: “Good-bye, a pleasant trip, and remember me 
sto:m: “gud'bai , a pleznt trip , dnd ri'membo mi: 
to your families at home!” 
td jo: faemiliz ot houm /” 
Storm waved to his friends as long as he could see 
sto:m weivd td hiz frendz oz log oz hi: kud si: 
them. Then he left the station with mixed feelings. 
bom . den hi: left do steifon wid mikst fi:ligz . 
He was sorry that his friends had gone, and yet at 
hi: woz sori dot hiz frendz hod gon , ond jet ot 
the same time he was very happy to be able to stay 
do seim taim hi: woz veri hxpi to bi: eibl to stei 
on for some time in England. He returned slowly to 
on jo SAm taim in igglond. hi: ri'tomd slouli to 
the hotel, thinking of his friends and of his relations 
do hou'tel , pigkig ov hiz frend? ond ov hiz ri'leifonz 
at home. 
ot houm. 
374 
The Fortieth (40th) Chapter. 
EXERCISE A. 
Mr. Edwards called Storm on the — to tell him some 
good news. On the day of their — from London, they 
went out to buy some presents for their friends and 
— at home, and especially for Wood’s sister. Wood 
had — her some nice present. When the saleswoman 
asked what — of thing he wanted, he said that some¬ 
thing to — would be best; but as he did not know 
what-his sister took, he decided to buy a bag of 
— for her. Goatskin is a very fine sort of — which 
is usually very expensive. The bags which she showed 
him cost forty shillings —. 
Many people think that when they have seen the — 
of a country, they have seen the — country, but Eng¬ 
land has many other big towns of great —. The best 
knives are made of —, because steel is such a hard —. 
Steel is really — which has been made hard. 
EXERCISE B. 
Why was Storm’s manager pleased that Storm had 
been offered a position in the London branch of the 
firm? . . . What was the promise that Wood had made 
to his sister? . . . What did he buy for her? . . . Why 
did Wood say that he was jealous of Storm? . . . What 
is the capital of England? . . . What English towns do 
you know that are famous for their metal articles? . . . 
What is steel? . . . What do the English mostly use for 
their fires? . . . What is exported from Newcastle? . . . 
What is Manchester famous for? . . . Did Storm take 
leave of his friends at the hotel? . . . What was the last 
thing that Storm said to his friends before the train 
left? ... 
WORDS: 
telephone 
call 
hope 
departure 
relation 
promise (verb) 
promise 
sort 
size 
saleswoman 
hand-bag 
leather 
goat 
goatskin 
skin 
apiece 
jealous 
fare 
capital 
importance 
metal 
steel 
iron 
coal 
export 
knowledge 
method 
hard 
remember 
375 
Chapter Forty (40). 
EXERCISE C. 
How to ask and answer questions with ‘must’ 
or 'have to\ 
Must Mrs. Miller always stay at home? Answer . . . 
Question . . .? Yes, when you go to England, you must 
pay duty on such things as wine or silk. Do you have 
to show your passports to get into England? Answer 
. . . Question . . .? Yes, you have to cross the sea to get 
to England. Did the young men have to do much work 
at their studies before they went to England? Answer... 
Question . . .? No, Storm did not have to pay his own 
fare. Has Wood had to take extra work in the evenings 
to get money for the trip? Answer ... Question ...? No. 
Mrs. Miller has not had to stay at home every time 
Mr. Miller has been to England; only this year, because 
their son is so small. Will Storm have to return home 
with his friends? Answer . . . Question . . .? Yes, the 
others will have to go back when their holidays are 
over. Would Wood have had to stay at home if he 
had not got a rise? Answer . . . Question . . .? No, if 
her son had been older, Mrs. Miller would not have 
had to stay at home. Must English children go to 
school when they are four years old? Answer . . . 
Question . . .? No, English children do not have to go 
to school after they are fifteen years old. Must all 
French children learn English at school? Answer . . . 
Question . . .? No, not all children have to write with 
pens and ink at school; the small children write with 
pencils. 
376 
Chapter Forty-One (41). 
The Forty-First (41st) Chapter. 
THE FIRST DAY AT THE OFFICE 
The morning after the departure of his friends, Storm 
6d mo.niy a: I to bd di'pa:tfor ov hiz frendz , sto:m 
went by bus to his new office, where he was at once 
went bai b\s td hiz nju: ofis, hwed hi: WdZ dt w\ns 
taken in to see the manager. “Good morning, sir,” 
teikn in td si: 5d mxnidp. “gud mo:nig t 5a:,” 
Storm said as he entered the manager’s office: “It is 
sto:m sed dz hi: entdd bd maenidpz ofis. “it iz 
really a great pleasure to me to start working here.” 
ridli d grcit plep td mi: td sta:t wo:kiy hid." 
“Good morning, Storm,” answered the manager, “it is 
“gud mo:nig y sto:m ,” a:nsdd bd maenidp , “it iz 
also a pleasure to us to have you work for us.” “I am 
o:lsou d plep tu as td hsev ju: wd:k fdr as.” “ai dm 
not only pleased to start here, but I am glad to remain 
not ounli pli:zd td sta:t hid , bdt ai dm glaed td ri'mein 
in London. There are still so many things that I wish 
in l\nddn. bed stil sou meni piyz bdt ai wif 
to see, and now that I am going to remain here for 
td si: f ond nau bdt ai om gouiy to ri'mein hid fdr 
another five or six months, it will be possible for me to 
on Abo faiv d siks m\nps , it wit bi: posobl fd mi: td 
see them all,” Storm continued. “I think you said it 
si: bom o:l ,” sto:m kon'tinju:d. “ai piyk ju: sed it 
It is a great 
pleasure to me = 
I am very pleased. 
remain = stay 
n/i 
377 
Chapter Forty-One (41). 
matter = thing 
receive = get 
before receiving 
(here) = before 
you receive 
was your first visit to a foreign country. Don’t you 
woz jo: fo:st vizit tu o forin kxntri. dount ju: 
think that you will miss many things that you were 
piyk dot ju: wil mis meni pirjz dot ju: wo: 
used to at home?” asked the manager. “Yes,” said 
ju:st tu ot houm?** a:skt do mxnidp. “jes** sed 
Storm, “there are some things at home that I shall 
sto:m, “deo s\m piyz ot houm dot ai fol 
miss in England. There will, perhaps, also be things 
mis in iyglond. deo wil, pohxps, o:lsou bi: piyz 
that will seem strange to me, because they are different 
dot wil si:m streind$ to mi:, bi'koz dei a: dijront 
from what I am used to. But it will be very interesting 
from hwot ai om ju:st tu . bot it wil bi: veri intristiy 
to see things that are different, things that are strange 
to si: piyz dot a: dijront , piyz dot a: streindj 
to me.” 
to mi:.** 
“There is another matter that I should like to mention,” 
“doz o'nxdo mxto dot ai fod laik to menfon,** 
said the manager. “You will not receive your salary 
sed do mxnidp. “ju: wil not ri'si:v jo: sxlori 
until the end of the month. If you have to wait four 
\n'til di end ov do m\np. if ju: hxv to weit jo: 
weeks before receiving any money, will you have 
wi:ks bi'jo: ri'si:vir) eni m\ni, wil ju: hxv 
enough?” “No,” said Storm, “I must find a room, and 
i'n\f?** “nou,** sed sto:m , “ai most faind o ru:m , ond 
378 
The Forty-First (41st) Chapter. 
it will be necessary to pay for it in advance when I 
it wil bi: nesisdri td pei for it in od'va:ns hwen ai 
take it.” “There will be other things, too,” said the 
teik it .” “ded wil bi: \do piyz, fu:,” sed dd 
manager, “so it will be necessary for you to have some 
msenidp , "sou it wil bi: nesisdri jo ju: to hsev sdm 
money. If you like, you may have part of your salary 
m\ni. if ju: laik, ju: mei hsev pa:t du jo: sselori 
in advance, and you might just as well have the money 
in dd'vcr.ns , ond ju: mait dpst oz wel hsev dd m\ni 
now.” “It is very kind of you, sir, to make me this offer. 
nau .” “it iz veri kaindov juso:, to meik mi: dis ofo. 
I shall be very glad to accept it. I never had much accept = agree 
ai fol bi: veri glsed tu ok'sept it. ai nevo hsed m\tf 
money, and after a fortnight’s holiday one hasn’t got 
m\ni 9 ond a.ftor o fo.tnaits holidi w\n hseznt got 
very much money.” 
veri m\tf m\ni .” 
The manager laughed, saying, “I can very well under- 
do msenidp la:jt 9 seiig 9 “ai kon veri wel \ndo- 
stand that you haven’t got very much money after a 
'stwnd dot ju: hsevnt got veri m\tf m\ni a:ftor o 
fortnight’s holiday. I am glad that you will accept my 
jo.tnaits holidi. ai om glsed dot ju: wil ok'sept mai 
offer. And while we are speaking of this matter, you 
ojo. ond hwail wi: a: spi.kiy ov dis meets, ju: 
had better tell me how much money you require.” require = need 
hod beio tel mi: hau m\tf m\ni ju: ri'kwaio .” 
379 
Chapter Forty-One (41). 
send for = send a 
person to call 
six feet = 1.83 
metres (one foot 
= 12 inches = 
0.305 metre) 
Storm said that he didn’t know the prices in England 
sto:m sed dot hi: didnt nou do praisiz in iyglond 
yet, so that it was a little difficult for him to say how 
jet , sou ddt it wdz 9 litl difikdlt /a him td sei hau 
much he would require. At last, however, they agreed 
m\tf hi: wdd rikwaio. dt la:st 9 hau'evd, dei o'gri:d 
to make the advance ten pounds. 
td meik di od'vams ten paundz. 
The manager now sent for a young Englishman by the 
dd maenidp nau sent fdr a / at? iyglifmon bai dd 
name of Marshall and asked him to introduce Storm 
neim dv ma:fdl dnd a:skt him tu intro dju:s sto:m 
to everybody in the office, and also to tell him about 
tu evribodi in di ofis , dnd odsou td tel him obaul 
his work. Storm was six feet tall, and he noticed that 
hiz Wd:k. sto:m woz siks ji:t /a.7, dnd hi: noutist ddt 
the Englishman was also about six feet tall, so that the 
di iyglifmon woz odsou d'baut siks ji:t to:l 9 sou dot dd 
two young men were of about the same height. Many 
tu: j\y men wd:r ov obaut do seim hait. meni 
Englishmen are tall; their height is greater than that 
iyglifmon a: tod; deo hait iz greito don dcet 
of people in many foreign countries. Marshall said that 
ov pi:pl in meni jorin kxntriz. ma:fdl sed ddt 
he would lead the way, and he went in front, telling 
hi: wdd li:d do wei , ond hi: went in fr\nt , leliy 
Storm to follow him. “All right,” replied Storm, “if 
sto:m to folou him. “od raitri'plaid sto:m , “if 
380 
The Forty-First (41st) Chapter. 
you will lead, I will follow you.” 
ju: wil li:d , ai wil folou ju 
Marshall asked Storm how long he had worked for 
ma:Jdl a:skt sto:m hau log hi: hdd Wd:kt fd 
the firm at home and learnt that he had worked for 
dd fd:m dt houm dnd h:nt ddt hi: hod wo:kt fd 
the firm for five years, so that he had had five years’ 
dd fd:m fd faiv fhz , sou ddt hi: hdd hsed faiv fidz 
experience. “I have only worked for the firm for four 
iks'pidridns. (i ai hdv ounli u)d:kt fd dd fd:m fd fo: 
years,” Marshall said. “I have less experience than 
jidz” ma:fdl sed. “ai hxv les iks'pidridns ddn 
you. How long have you been learning English?” 
ju:. hau log hdv ju: him hmig iyglif?" 
“About nine months,” said Storm, “but although I can 
“d'baut nain m\nps” sed sto:m , “bdt o:ldou ai kon 
say many things, I can’t express myself as well as I 
sei meni pigz , ai kamt iks'pres mai'self dz wel dz ai 
should like to. But now I shall get as much practice and 
fdd laik tu. bdt nau ai fdi get dz m\tf prxktis dnd 
experience in speaking your language as I could wish.” 
iks'pidridns in spi.kig jo: Lrggwidj dz ai kdd wif .” 
“You express yourself quite well in English, and as you 
“ju: iks'pres jo:'self kwait wel in iyglif , dnd dz ju: 
will be speaking nothing but English from now on, 
wil bi: spi:kiy nxpiy bdt igglif frdm nau on , 
you will soon get great practice in expressing yourself. 
ju: wil sum get greit preektis in iks'presiy jo:'self. 
lead the way = go 
in front and show 
the way 
He leads, he led, 
he has led 
[li:dz , led , led). 
11/2 
381 
Chapter Forty-One (41). 
pronounce a word 
= say a word as 
it should be said 
suppose = think 
so far = until now 
Do you find that English words are difficult to 
du: ju: faind dot iyglif wo:dz a: dijikolt to 
pronounce?” “Sometimes,” Storm answered, “your 
pronouns?" “s\mtaimz ,” sto:m a:nsod f “jo: 
words are difficult for my tongue to pronounce, but I 
wo:dz a: difikolt fo mai t\y to pronouns , bol ai 
suppose that after a time my mouth and my tongue 
so'pouz dot a:ftor o taim mai maup ond mai t\y 
will get used to the English pronunciation.” “Yes, I 
wil get ju:st to di iygliJ pronxnsi'eifon." “jes , ai 
suppose they will. I am quite sure that the pronunci- 
sopouz dei wil . ai om kwail fuo dot do pron\nsi- 
ation of the words in your language would be very 
'eifon ov, do wo:dz in jo: Ueygwidj wod bi: veri 
difficult to me at first. The manager told me this is 
dijikolt to mi: ot fo:st. do mcenidp tould mi: dis iz 
your first visit to England. Do you like what you have 
jo: fo:st uizit tu iyghnd. du: ju: laik hwot ju: hov 
seen of England?’ 
si:n ov iyghnd?'' 
Storm told him that so far he had enjoyed his stay 
sto:m tould him dot sou fa: hi: hod in'dpid hiz stei 
in England very much, and that although he had 
in irjghnd veri m\tf t ond dot o:l'dou hi: hod 
learned about England at school, he was glad to see for 
h.nd obaut iyglond ot sku:l t hi: woz glxd to si: fo 
himself what the country was really like. He said that 
himself hwot do k*\nlri woz rioli laik. hi: sed dot 
382 
The Forty-First (41st) Chapter. 
the things you read about a foreign country are not 
do piyz ju: ri:d o'baut a jorin k\ntri a: not 
always the real facts. If you want to know what another 
o:lwdz do riol jsekts. if ju: wont to nou hwot on Abo 
country is like, it is necessary for you to visit it your- 
k\ntri iz laik 9 it iz nesisori jo ju: to vizit it jo:- 
self. It is a fact that books do not always give you the 
'self, it iz o jsekt dot buks du: not o:lwoz giv ju: do 
right impression. 
rait im'prefon. 
The firm was divided into five different departments, 
do fo:m woz di'vaidid into jaiv dijront di'pa:tmonts 9 
each with its own work to take care of. In order that 
i:tf wid its oun wo:k to teik keor ov. in o:do dot 
in order that = 
so that 
Storm might see everything, Marshall took him round 
slo:m mait si: cvripiy , ma:fol tuk him round 
to each of the five departments of the firm. “It is my 
tu i:tf ov do faiv di'pa:tmonts ov do jo:m. “it iz mai 
experience,” said Marshall, “that the men in the 
iks'piorions” sed ma:fol 9 “dot do men in do 
different departments all think that the work they take 
dijront di'pa:tmonts o:l phjk dot do wo:k dei teik 
care of is the most important. I think you will have 
keor ov iz do moust im'po.tont. ai piyk ju: wil hcev 
the same experience. We'll begin by going to the 
do seim iks'piorions. wi:l bi'gin bai gouiy to do 
factory where the different goods are made." Marshall 
jwktori hweo do dijront gudz a: meid." ma:fol 
383 
Chapter Forty-One (41). 
led the way to the factory, and one of the men working 
led do wei td dd fxktori , 9nd w\n 9V 69 men wo.kiy 
there explained to Storm that this was the place where 
deo iks'pleind t9 sto:m d9t dis W 9 Z do pleis hweo 
the goods were made. “We produce the goods, that is, 
69 gudz W9: meid. “wi: prd'dju:s 69 gudz t daet iz, 
we make the goods here. The other departments may 
wi: meik 69 gudz hio. di a 69 di'pa:tmonts mei 
be useful, but remember that we produce the things.” 
bi: ju.sful, b 9 t ri'membo d9t wi: pr9'dju:s 69 piyz” 
later on = later 
Later on, they went into the department where the 
leit9r on, dei went int9 69 di'pa:tmont hwe9 69 
books were kept. Here they were told the same thing 
bilks W9: kept, hio dei wo: tould do seim pig 
as in the factory: the department that keeps the books 
oz in do fxktori: do di'pa:tmont dot ki:ps do buks 
and gets the money for the goods that have been 
ond gets do m\ni fo do gudz dot hov bi:n 
produced and sold, must be the most important. The 
pro'dju.st ond sould, most bi: do moust im'po.tont. do 
man to whom they spoke in this department told Storm 
mxn to hu:m dei spouk in dis dipa.tmont tould sto:m 
Scotchman = Scot 
that he was a Scot and not an Englishman. He showed 
dot hi: woz 0 skot ond not on igglifmon. hi: foud 
Marshall a big book, saying to him, “Everybody that 
ma:fol o big buk, seiig to him, “evribodi dot 
buys from us has an account in this book, in order that 
baiz from as hxz on o'kaunl in dis buk , in o:do dot 
384 
The Forty-First (41st) Chapter. 
we may know how much money he owes us, that is, 
wi: mei nou hau m\tj m\ni hi: ouz as, d&t iz, 
how much money he has to pay us. You can see that 
hau mAif m\ni hi: hxz td pei as. ju: kdn si: dot 
there are hundreds of accounts in this book, and I am 
5ed h\ndrddz dv d'kaimts in dis buk, dnd ai dm 
sure you’ll agree that it is very important to collect 
fud ju:l d'gri: ddt it iz veri im'po:tdnt td kd'lekt 
the money that people owe us as quickly as possible. 
d? m\ni ddt pi:pl ou as dz kwikli dz posdbl. 
That is my work. I am a book-keeper, and I take care 
diet iz mai Wd:k. ai dm d bukki:pd, dnd ai teik kedr 
of the book-keeping.” Marshall told Storm that the 
dv 5d bukki.piy” ma:fdl tould sto:m ddt dd 
London branch of the firm had been established in the 
l\nddn bra:nf dv dd fd:m hdd bi:n is'taeblift in dd 
year 1909, and that this Scotchman, or Scot as 
jhnainti:nounain,dnd ddt dis skotfmdn, o: skdt dz 
he called himself, had started working for the firm in 
hi: ko:ld himself, hdd sta:tid Wd:kig fd do fd:m in 
the same year; he had worked for it ever since it was 
dd seim fid; hi: hdd Wd.kt jdr it evd sins it wdz 
established. Storm asked Marshall what a man who 
is'taeblift. sto:m a:skt ma:fdl hwot d mien hu: 
works in an office is called, and learned that he is 
Wd.ks in dn of is iz ko:ld, dnd h:nd ddt hi: iz 
called a clerk. “You and I are clerks, then,” said Storm. 
ko:ld o kla:k. “ju: dnd ai a: kla:ks, den” sed sto:m. 
collect money = 
ask for and get 
the money people 
owe one 
385 
Chapter Forty-One (41). 
post = 
attend 
care of 
“I have never heard the word ‘clerk* before.** 
“ai hov nevo ho:d bo Wd:d ' kla:k * bi'fo :.** 
After visiting the other departments, they went to their 
a:fto vizitiy di a bo di'pa.tmonts, bei went id dedr 
own, the correspondence department. Marshall now told 
oun 9 id koris'ponddns dipa:tmdnt. ma:fol nau tould 
Storm about his work. “We receive all the foreign post, 
sto:m d'baut hiz wo:k. “ wi: risi:v o:l 5d forin poust , 
or foreign mail as we usually call it,** he said, “and 
o: forin meil dz wi: ju:$uoli ko:l it” hi: sed 9 "dnd 
first of all we open the letters, after which we take 
fd:st ov o:l wi: oupon bo letdz , a:ftd hwitf wi: teik 
them to the different departments in order to get the 
bom to id difront di'pa:imonts in o:do to get di 
answers. When you open the letters, there is a very 
a:nsoz . hwen ju: oupon id letoz , boz o veri 
good chance of getting some foreign stamps if you*re 
gud tfa:ns ov getiy som forin stsemps if juor 
interested in collecting stamps. Later in the day, we 
intristid in kolektiy stomps, leitor in bo dei , wi: 
have to see that all the foreign letters are written and 
hsev to si: dot o:l bo forin letoz a: ritn ond 
to 
take 
the mail sent off. These are the matters that we attend 
bo meil sent o:f. bi:z a: bo mcetoz dot wi: o'tend 
to in this department. You may be sure that it is quite 
tu in bis di'pa:tmont. ju: mei bi: Juo dot it iz kwait 
enough to attend to, for the foreign mail is very big.*’ 
i l n\f tu otend tu f fo bo forin meil iz veri big” 
386 
The Forty-First (41st) Chapter. 
“Thank you very much for all the useful information 
“pxyk ju: veri mhtj j9T o:l 69 ju:sful inf9'meif9i\ 
you have given me,” said Storm. “If I want any more 
ju: h9V givn mi: t ” sed sto:m. “if ai wont eni mo:r 
information about my work or other things here, I 
inf9'meif9n obaut mai W9:k o:r \S9 piyz hh f ai 
hope I mav come to you for it.” 
houp oi mei k\rn t9 ju: \9T it” 
EXERCISE A. 
It was a — to Storm to be able to — in London for WORDS: 
another six months, although he might — his family, pleasure 
The manager made him the — that he might — part remain 
of his salary in —.He — the offer, because he had not m i S s 
very much —, but he had not had — enough with offer 
prices in England to know how much money he receive 
would —. Storm — that he and Marshall were of the advance 
same —; they were both six —. In — that Storm might in advance 
learn to — himself well in English and to — the words accept 
right, he would require a lot of —. His — must get experience 
used to the English —.A — is a man who — the books require 
of a firm and takes — of the many hundreds of — strange 
which show how much money people — the firm, height 
Marshall — the way to the different — of the firm, foot 
and Storm — him from one department to another, in order 
Every — in the office and every man in the — where express 
the — were produced, thought that the work he — to pronounce 
was the most important. Marshall gave Storm the — pronunciation 
that his work would be to receive and take care of the practice 
foreign —. Storm — that he might come to Marshall tongue 
387 
Chapter Forty-One (41). 
book-keeper 
book-keeping 
keep books 
care 
account 
owe 
lead 
led 
department 
follow 
clerk 
factory 
goods 
produce 
attend to 
information 
post 
suppose 
matter 
establish 
fact 
Scotchman 
collect 
mail 
later on 
learn 
if there were other — that he wanted information 
about. The firm had been — in the year 1909. It is a 
— that book-keepers think that their work, —, is the 
most important. The book-keeper of the firm was a —. 
EXERCISE B. 
Write about your holidays last summer or some other 
year. The exercise should have a length of 200—300 
words. Tell us when you had your holidays, whether 
you went away from home during the holidays, how 
you travelled, where you went, what you did, and 
anything else that you remember. Use your own words 
as well as you can. If you cannot always remember the 
right words, try to explain what you mean in some 
other way. 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
If you have started the study of “English by the Nature 
Method ,f only in order to be able to speak to and under¬ 
stand an Englishman as well as to read a newspaper 
or a good book in the English language, you need not 
work at this exercise. But if you want to go on with 
the study of English after you have finished reading 
these chapters, for example, in order to become a 
teacher of English, or because you are interested in 
the language itself, it will be necessary for you to go 
through Exercise C. It tells you something about the 
different sorts of words of which the English language 
is made up, arid how to use them, in other words, it 
teaches you English grammar in English. 
388 
The Forty-First (41st) Chapter. 
Language is made up of words. When we speak, we 
put the words together into sentences [sentdnsiz]. Man, 
woman, teacher, always, are words. “He is a good man”, 
is a sentence [senhns]; the words: he, is, a, good, man, 
have been put together to make a sentence. Grammar 
[grxmd] teaches us how to use the different words of a 
language and how to make sentences of them. We are 
now going to have some short exercises in English 
grammar. 
The names of the things or the people that we speak 
about in our sentences are called nouns [naunz]. Man 
is a noun [naiz/i], woman is a noun, Storm is a noun, 
London is a noun. Here are some more nouns: boy, 
cow, ice, book, train, paper, day, month, year, office, 
firm, teacher, experience, fact, department. These are 
all nouns, that is, they are names of people or of things 
that we can tell something about. 
When a noun tells us of one thing or one person only, 
we call it a singular [shjgjuh] noun, or we say that the 
noun is in the singular. Man, woman, boy, book, horse, 
are all singular nouns. Only one man, one woman, etc., 
is mentioned. 
When a noun tells us of two or more things or persons, 
we call it a plural [pliidrA] noun, or we say that the 
word is in the plural. Men, women, boys, books, horses, 
are all in the plural; they are plural nouns, because 
they mention more than one man, more than one 
woman, etc. Most English nouns add -s in the plural, 
for instance: girl, house, room, tree, person, animal. 
11/3 
389 
Chapter Forty-One (41). 
When we speak of more than one of these, we say: 
girls, houses, rooms, trees, persons, animals. 
Some English nouns, however, have no -s in the plural, 
for instance: man, woman, child. The plurals of these 
three nouns are: men, women, children. We are going 
to hear more about this in the next chapter. 
Questions: 
What are sentences made of? ... What do we call the 
sort of words which give the names of the things or 
the people that we speak of? ... Write some examples 
of such words. ... What do we call a noun which tells 
us of only one thing or one person? ... Write a few 
examples of such nouns. ... Explain what a plural noun 
is. ... How can you tell whether a noun is in the 
singular or in the plural? ... Do you know any English 
nouns that do not end in -s in the plural? ... 
390 
Chapter Forty-Two (42). 
The Forty-Second (42nd) Chapter. 
A KIND OFFER 
Marshall now showed Storm the desk at which he was 
ma:Jol nau foud sto:m do desk 9t hwitf hi: W9Z 
desk = writing 
table 
to sit when working. At both sides of the desk there 
t9 sit hwen wo:kig. 9t boup saidz 9U 59 desk be9 
were four or five drawers. “We keep a good supply of 
W9 : fo:r 9 faiv dro:9z. “wi: ki:p 9 gud so'plai 9V 
paper, ink, pens, pencils, etc., in the drawers. Then it 
peipo, igk 9 penz , penslz , it'setro, in 69 dro:9Z . ben it 
is unnecessary to go out and buy things of that sort 
iz \n'nesisori t9 gou aut 9nd bai pigz 9V bset so:t 
every day. You see, for instance, the supply of pencils 
evri dei . ju: si: 9 (or inst9ns 9 b9 S9'plai 9V penslz 
in this drawer; that will last for three months and 
in bis dro:9; bset wil la:st f9 pri: m\nps and 
means that we shall not have to buy any more pencils 
mi:nz bot wi: fol not hsev t9 bai eni mo: penslz 
for a long time. In the same way, the paper supply will 
for 9 log taim. in bo seim wei 9 bo peipo so'plai wil 
last for one month. We use a lot of thin paper for 
la:st /a w\n m\np. wi: ju:z a lot ov pin peipo jo 
copies, as we take a copy of every letter that we write. 
kopiz 9 oz wi: teik a kopi ov evri leto bot wi: rait. 
Sometimes we even take several copies of a letter when 
s\mtaimz wi: i:von teik sevrol kopiz ov a leto hwen 
391 
Chapter Forty-Two (42). 
it is a very important one.” 
it iz d veri im'po.tdnt w\n 
“You noticed,” Marshall continued, “that when we 
“ju: noutislma:Jdl koritinju.d , “ddt hwen wi: 
visited the different departments to see how the work 
vizitid dd difrdnt di'pa:tmdnts td si: hau dd Wd:k 
was organised, we went from one floor to another by 
u)9Z o:gdT\aizd , wi: went frdm w\n flo: tu o'nxdd bai 
the stairs. Instead we might have used the lift, which 
Sd steoz. in'sted wi: mait hdv ju:zd dd lift , hwitf 
goes all the way from the ground floor to the top floor 
gouz o:l dd wei frdm dd graund flo: td dd top flo: 
and stops at all floors. There is one lift for persons. 
dnd stops dt o:l flo:z. bdz w\n lift fd po:snz y 
and another lift for. goods. The lift that is used for 
dnd o'nxdd lift fd gudz. dd lift ddt iz ju:zd fd 
goods can easily lift as many pounds as the weight of 
gudz kdn i:zili lift dz meni paundz oz dd weit dv 
twenty big men. The one for persons is smaller; it 
twenti big men. dd w\n fd pd:snz iz smo:lo; it 
takes three persons at a time.” “Fine!” Storm said, 
teiks pri: po:snz dt d taim“fain!” sto:m sed y 
“if I have to go up to the fourth floor, you may be 
“if ai hxv td gou a p td do fo:p flo: y ju: mei bi: 
sure that I shall take the lift. Now that I have seen 
fud dot ai Jdl teik dd lift, nau ddt ai hdu si:n 
all the different departments, I must say that I am 
o:l dd difront di pa.tmonls, ai most sei dot ai dm 
392 
The Forty-Second (42nd) Chapter. 
really surprised at the size of this branch of the firm. 
rioli sd'praizd dt bd saiz ov bis bra:nf ov bd fd:m. 
Everything is bigger than I expected it to be.” “One 
evripiy iz bigd bdn ai iks'pektid it td bi €( w\n 
reason for this,” said Marshall, “is that the manager 
ri:zn jo bis” sed ma:fdl , “iz bdt bd maenidpr 
is a very good business man. All the departments work 
iz 9 veri gud biznis maen. o:l bd di'padmonts wo:k 
well together, even in the smallest things. All the work 
wel td'gebd , i:vdn in bd smo:list piyz. o:l bd wd:k 
of the firm is very well organised. I don’t think I ever 
dv bd jd:m iz veri wel o.gonaizd. ai dount pirjk ai evd 
saw a firm with more system and organisation in its 
so: d fo:m wib mo: sistim ond o:gonai'zeifon in its 
work, but then I haven’t seen a great many yet. But 
wo:k t bdt ben ai haevnt si:n d greit meni jet . bdt 
to speak of something quite different: Where are you 
td spi:k dv SAmpiy kwait difrdnt: hweor a: ju: 
staying?” “I have been staying at a hotel in Blooms- 
steiiyT' “ai hdv bi:n steiiy dt 9 hou'tel in blu:mz - 
bury,” answered Storm, “but I shall have to find some- 
bdri” a:nsod sto:m , “bdt ai fdl haev td jaind s\m - 
thing cheaper.” “The manager told me that he thought 
piy tfi:pd” “bd maenidp touldmi: bdt hi: pod 
you would be wanting a room, and I have an offer to 
ju: wod bi: wontiy 0 ru:m, ond ai haev on ofo to 
make you. We have a bedroom at home which we never 
meik ju:. wi: haev 0 bedrum dt houm hwitf wi: nova 
393 
Chapter Forty-Two (42). 
use. It was my sister’s, but she is married now. Would 
ju:z. it wdz mai sistdz , bdt fi: iz maerid nau. wdd 
you like to come and live with us? I live alone with 
ju: laik is k\m dnd liv wid a s? ai liv o'loun wid 
my parents, as all my brothers and sisters are married, 
mai peoronts, oz o:l mai br\doz dnd sistdz a: maerid , 
and I should be glad to have some company.” “Thank 
dnd ai fdd bi: glaed id haev Sdm kxmponi .” “paeyk 
you very much, it is very kind of you. I shall be glad 
ju: veri m\tf 9 it iz veri kaind dv ju:. ai fdl bi: glaed 
to accept your kind offer, especially as it will mean 
tu ok'sept jo: kaind ojd 9 is'pefoli dz it wil mi:n 
that I shall have pleasant company.” 
Sot ai fol haev pleznt kxmponi .” 
“I think it will be an advantage for you to live with 
“ai pirjk it wil bi: on od'va:ntid$ jo ju: to liv wid 
us,” said Marshall. “There are many things you will 
as ,” sed ma:fol. “deo meni pigz ju: wil 
want to see, and I might be your guide and show you 
wont to si: 9 ond ai mait bi: jo: gaid ond foil ju: 
the most interesting things.” “Thank you, it would be 
do moust intristig pigz .” “paegk ju: 9 it wod bi: 
fine to have you as a guide to show me the town.” “As 
jain to haev ju: oz o gaid to fou mi: do taun .” “oz 
soon as we finish at the office this afternoon, we can 
su:n oz wi: jinif ot di ojis dis a:fto'nu:n 9 wi: kon 
go to your hotel and pay the bill and then go straight 
gou to jo: hou'tel ond pei do bit ond den gou streit 
394 
The Forty-Second (42nd) Chapter. 
down to my home. Have you got many bags?” “No,” 
daun to mai houm. hov ju: got meni bsegz ?” “noii,” 
said Storm, “I have only one bag, and there are so 
sed sio:m , “ai hxv ounli w\n bxg , ond deo sou 
few things in it that it is not heavy to carry. I am glad 
(ju: piyz in it dot it iz not hevi to kxri. ai om glxd 
of this, for the weather is very hot, and it would not be 
ov Sis , jo do wcdor iz veri hot , ond it wod not bi: 
very pleasant to carry a heavy weight in such a heat.” 
veri pleznt to kxri o hevi weit in s\tf o hi:t .” 
Having got Storm’s bag, the two young men went to 
hxviy got sto:mz bxg, do tu: j\y men went to 
the Underground. In the streets' the heat was still very 
di \ndograund. in do stri:ts do hi:t woz stil veri 
great, but in the Underground train the air was quite 
greit , bot in di \ndograund trein di eo woz kwait 
cool. After having got so hot, they were glad to feel 
ku:l. a:jto hxviy got sou hot , dei wo: glxd to fi:l 
cool again. Storm found the house of Marshall’s parents 
ku:l o'gein. sto:m faund do haus ov ma:Jolz peoronts 
to be a typical English house with five rooms. He was 
to bi: o tipikol iyglif haus wid faiv ru:mz. hi: woz 
introduced to Mr. and Mrs. Marshall, after which Mrs. 
intro dju:st to mistor ond misiz ma. fol, a:jto hwitf misiz 
Marshall took him upstairs to his bedroom. He saw 
ma:fol tuk him 'a p'steoz to hiz bedrum. hi: so: 
that there was a nice comfortable bed, a large table, 
dot deo woz o nais kAmfotobl bed , o la:d$ teibl f 
395 
Chapter Forty-Two (42). 
chest of drawers 
linen (here) = 
shirts, handker¬ 
chiefs, underwear, 
etc. (which are 
made of linen) 
He hangs, 
he hung, 
he has hung 
[hcerjz, h\r /, h\rj]. 
pAotogra/iA 
an armchair, a sofa, a chest of drawers, a wardrobe, 
on ' a:nitfed , a scujo, a tfest ov dro:dz , a wo:droub , 
and some other pieces of furniture. He was very happy 
dnd Sdm \do pi:siz ov fd:nitfd. hi: Wdz veri heepi 
to see so much furniture, much more than there had 
/a si: sou m\tf fo:nitfo , ni\tf mo: don deo hod 
been in the hotel room. 
bi:n in do houtel ru:m. 
Storm opened his bag and took out some shirts, hand- 
slo:m oupond hiz beeg ond tuk ant som Jo:ts , hxy- 
kerchiefs, etc., and went to the chest of drawers and 
kotfifSy itsetro , ond went to do tfest ov dro:oz ond 
opened one of the drawers. As he had come to England 
oupond WAn ov do dro:oz . oz hi: hod k\m tu iijqlond 
for a fortnight only, he had brought very little linen 
for a fo:tnait ounli, hi: hod bro:t veri litl linin 
and would have to buy some more in London. There 
ond wod h<TV to bai som mo:r in t\ndon. deo 
were some pictures on the walls, but Mrs. Marshall 
wo: som piktfoz on do wo:lz , bot misiz ma:fol 
said that perhaps he would like to hang up some 
sed dot pohveps hi: wod laik to hver) a p som 
pictures of his own or some photographs of relations 
piktfoz ov hiz oun o: som foutografs ov ri'leifonz 
or friends. Storm replied that he had no pictures to 
o: frendz. sto:m ri'plaid dot hi: hoed nou piktfoz to 
hang up, but he had a photograph of his father. He 
hxr) a p, bot hi: hoed a foutogra:/ ov hiz fa:do. hi: 
396 
The Forty-Second (42nd) Chapter. 
told Mrs. Marshall that he had no father now; his 
tould misiz ma:fal dal hi: heed non ja:5a nau; hiz 
father was dead. “I am very sorry,” said Mrs. Marshall, 
fa:da waz ded. ,( ai am veri sari” sed misiz ma:fal, 
“to hear that your father is not alive. How long has 
“ta hia dot jo: fa:dar iz not alaiu . hau lor) hoz 
he been dead?” “Let me see,” answered Storm, “he 
hi: bi:n ded?” ‘let mi: si:” a:nsod sto:m, “hi: 
was alive until shortly after I became a clerk, so he 
waz alaiv An'til fo:tli a:jlar ai bi'keim a kla:k, sou hi: 
has been dead for five years.” 
haz bi:n ded fa faiv jiaz” 
Mrs. Marshall now showed Storm some hooks in a 
misiz ma:fal nau foud sto:m som huks in a 
comer of the room, upon which he could hang some 
ko:nar av da ru:m, a'pan hwitf hi: kad haey s\m 
of his clothes. He took one or two things out of his bag 
av hiz kloudz. hi: tuk wau a tu: piyz aut av hiz bseg 
and hung them on hooks, and the rest he hung in the 
and hxrj dam on huks, and da rest hi: hAy in da 
wardrobe. She also pointed to the door, which had a 
wo.droub. fi: o:lsou pointid ta da do:, hwitf haed a 
key in the lock, and told Storm that she would give 
ki: in da lok , and tould sto:m dat fi: wad giv 
him a key to the front door, too. He thanked Mrs. 
him a ki: ta da frxnt do:, tu:. hi: paegkt misiz 
Marshall for thinking of all these things, but said, 
ma:fal fa piykig av o:l di:z piy?> bat scd y 
the rest — the 
other things 
lock 
397 
Chapter Forty-Two (42). 
come of = 
fall off 
He sews, 
he sewed, 
he has sewn 
\souz , soudy soun|. 
extremely = very 
however, that he didn’t think it necessary to lock his 
hau'evdy dot hi: didnt pigk it nesisori td lok hiz 
bedroom door. 
bedrum do:. 
Mrs. Marshall told Storm that if a button should come 
misiz ma:Jdl tould sto:m dot if 9 b\tn fdd k\m 
off his coat, she would be glad to sew it on again. 
o:f hiz kouty fi: wdd bi: glaed td sou it on d'gein. 
“Such things,” she said, “are not difficult for a woman 
“sAtf piyZy” fi: sed f “a: not difikdlt for o wumon 
to do; they’re quite simple, because we do them so 
td du:; deo kwait simply bi'koz wi: du: 6om sou 
often, but they’re not always simple for men.” “That 
o:fn 9 bot deo not o:lwoz simpl fo men. 19 “daet 
is extremely kind of you, Mrs. Marshall. Once, when I 
iz iks'tri.mli kaind ov ju: f misiz ma.fol. WAns t hwenai 
was in the country on holiday, I sewed on some buttons 
woz in do kAntri on holidiy ai soud on som bAtnz 
which had come off, but the next day they came off 
hwitf hod kAm 0 :/, bot do nekst dei dei keim o:f 
again; they were so badly sewn on. Although I really 
o'gein; dei wo: sou baedli soun on. od'dou ai rioli 
have only one thumb on each hand, as soon as I start 
hoev ounli WAn pAm on i:tf haend, oz sum oz ai sta:t 
sewing, I feel as if all five fingers were thumbs.” “I 
souir)y ai fid oz if od faiv figgoz wo: pAmz." “ai 
think there is only one more thing to ask you about,” 
pigk doz ounli WAn mo: pig tu a:sk ju: o'baut 11 
398 
The Forty-Second (42nd) Chapter. 
said Mrs. Marshall, “after which I will leave you with 
std misiz ma:fdl 9 “a:ftd hwitf ai wil li:v ju: wid 
my son. At what time would you like to get up in the 
mai s\n, dt hwot taim wdd ju: laik id get a p in dd 
morning, early or late?” “At home,” Storm answered, 
mo:niy 9 d:li a leit?” “dt houm” sto:m a:nsdd 9 
“I usually get up about seven o’clock in the morning.” 
“ai ju:judli get a p dbaut sevn d'klok in dd mo:niy” 
“That suits us very well. My son usually gets up a 
“devt sju:ts as veri wet. mai SAn ju:$udli gets a p d 
little later, so you can have the bathroom first. There 
litl leitd 9 sou ju: kdn hvev dd ba:prum fd:st. ded 
will be a special hook there for you to hang your 
wil bi: d spejdl huk ded jd ju: td fiver) jo: 
things on.” 
pigz on.” 
Mrs. Marshall now left the room, and the two young 
misiz ma:fdl nau left dd ru:m 9 dnd do tu: jAy 
men sat down to have a talk. Storm sat down in the 
men svet daun to heev a io:k. sto:m svet daun in di 
armchair, while Marshall lay down on the sofa and 
'a:m'tfed 9 hwail ma:Jdl lei daun on do soufo ond 
made himself comfortable. This was not difficult, for 
meid himself kAmfotobl. dis woz not dijikolt , /a 
there were two or three very good cushions on if. “I 
deo wd: tu: a pri: veri gud kufdnz on it. “ai 
am afraid I shall fall asleep,” said Marshall. “Yester- 
dm d'freid ai fol fo:l d [ sli:p 9 ” sed ma:fol. “jestd- 
He lies, he lay, 
he has lain 
[ laiz, lei , lein]. 
cushion 
399 
Chapter Forty-Two (42). 
day, I lay down after dinner, and before long I was 
di 9 ai lei daun a:fto dins, dnd bi'fo: lor) ai woz 
asleep. When you lie down on the sofa after a day’s 
o'sli:p . hwen ju: lai daun on do soufo a:jtor o deiz 
feel like 
want 
work and a nice dinner, you feel like a good sleep. But 
wo:k ond o nais dino t ju: fid laik o gud sli:p . bot 
perhaps you would like me to help you to hang up the 
po'hxps ju: wod laik mi: to help ju: to hxg a p do 
photograph? When we moved into this house, I put in 
foutogra:f? hwen wi: mu:vd into dis haus , ai put in 
the nails for all the pictures. I will go downstairs to 
do neilz for o:l do piktfoz. ai wil gou daun'steoz to 
get a nail for your photograph. It will be a good thing 
get o neil fo jo: foutogra.f. it wil bi: o gud pig 
to get it hung up at once; then the room will begin to 
to get it hxg a p ot wxns; den do ru:m wil bi'gin to 
look a little like home to you.” Storm wanted to hang 
luk o litl laik houm to ju:” sto:m wontid to hxg 
the photograph over the chest of drawers, and as it was 
do foutogra.f ouuo do tfest ov dro:oz t ond oz it woz 
too high for them to reach, Marshall stood on a chair. 
tu: hai fo dom to ri:tf , ma:fol stud on o tfeo. 
He was then able to reach the place where it was to 
hi: woz den eibl to ri:tf do pleis hweor it woz to 
hang, and before long the nail was in the wall and 
hxg 9 ond bi'fo: log do neil woz in do wod ond 
Storm’s photograph put up. 
sto:mz foutogra:f put a p. 
400 
The Forty-Second (42nd) Chapter. 
EXERCISE A. 
In the — of the desk the office keeps a — of pens, ink, WORDS: 
paper, etc., which is large enough to — for several drawer 
months, so that it is — to go out and buy more every supply 
day. An example of the good — and system of the last (verb) 
firm is that a — is taken of every letter written at unnecessary 
the office. The — on which goods are taken from the organisation 
ground floor to the top floor can — goods which have copy 
the same — as twenty big men. Storm said that it lift 
would be a great advantage for him to live at Marshall’s lift (verb) 
home, as he would have — in the evenings instead of heavy 
being alone, and a — to show him the town. On the company 
way home Storm noticed that although the sun was guide 
shining and there was a great — in the streets, the air heat 
in the Underground was quite —. There was a lot of cool 
furniture in Storm’s room, for instance, a — with furniture 
some — which Marshall put under his head when he — sofa 
down on it. Storm moved his things from his bag to the cushion 
— of drawers, and put handkerchiefs, shirts, etc., in stay 
one —. He had brought very little — and would have lie 
to buy some more in London. He then — his coat upon lay 
a — in a comer of the room, and on a — over the lain 
chest of drawers he hung a — of his father, who was chest 
no longer —; he had been — for five years. There was linen 
a — in the — of the door, but Storm said that he would hung 
have no use for it. Before she went down, Mrs. Marshall hook 
offered to — on a — if one should come off. “That is nail 
so — for a woman to do, while a man feels as if he photograph 
has ten — on his hands when he has to do a thing alive 
like that.” dead 
401 
Chapter Forty-Two (42). 
reach 
key 
lock 
lock (verb) 
sew 
sewed 
sewn 
button 
simple 
thumb 
desk 
organise 
wardrobe 
rest 
extremely 
badly 
EXERCISE B. 
Answer these questions with full sentences, but not 
necessarily with the real facts: 
Do you live in a town or in the country? ... Do you live 
with your parents? ... What is your work? ... What do 
you like to do when you are not working? ... How do 
you get to and from your work? ... How old are you? ... 
How many persons are there in your family? ... Have 
you ever been outside your own country?... When 
did you begin to study English? ... Which do you like 
best of the languages that you know? ... 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
Every word is made up of sounds [ saundz ]. It is the sounds 
that we hear when a word is pronounced. A word is 
written with letters. The word ‘height’ has six letters, 
but it is pronounced with only four sounds: hait. We 
see, therefore, that the letters and the sounds of a word 
are not always the same. The sounds of a word are put 
together into syllables [sihblz]. The word ‘height’ has 
only one syllable [sibbl], but the word ‘follow’ has two, 
and the word ‘establish’ has three syllables. 
We heard last time that most English nouns add an -s 
in the plural, which is used when we speak of more 
than one person or thing. For instance, book — books, 
dog — dogs, pen — pens, river — rivers. If the word 
ends [endz] in an s-sound, which means that the last 
sound is either s, z, f, or j, the plural ends in -es 
[pronounced -iz] For instance, church — churches 
[//»;// — tfd.tfiz], box — boxes [boks — boksiz], dish — 
402 
The Forty-Second (42nd) Chapter. 
dishes [dif — difiz ], glass — glasses [ff/a.-s — gla:siz]. Some 
words are written with an -e after the s-sound in the 
singular. Then only -s is added, but the -s together 
with the -e is pronounced as an extra syllable: iz. For 
instance, experience — experiences [iks'pwrhns — iks - 
'phrtensiz ], bridge — bridges [bridj — bridjiz ], horse — 
horses [ho:s — ho:siz]. 
Some words that end in -o in the singular, add -es in 
the plural, for instance, potato ; — potatoes [pd'teitou. — 
pd'teitouz ]. 
Most words that end in -y in the singular, change -y 
into -i in the plural and add -es. For instance, enemy 
— enemies [enimi — enimiz ], lady — ladies [leidi — leidiz ], 
city — cities [siti — sitiz ], baby — babies [beibi — bei- 
biz ], sky — skies [skai — skaiz ]. 
But if one of the letters a, e, o, u goes before -y in the 
singular, the -y remains in the plural. For instance, 
boy — boys [boi — boiz], day — days [dei — deiz ], key — 
keys [ki: — ki:z]. 
Questions: 
Is a sound and a letter always the same thing? ... What 
do we call the parts into which we can divide words? ... 
What nouns add -es in the plural? ... When is the -y 
at the end of some nouns changed into -i? ... And what 
nouns ending in -y do not change this -y into an -i in 
the plural? ... 
403 
Chapter Forty-Three (43). 
The Forty-Third (43rd) Chapter. 
THE FOUR PEOPLES OF 
THE BRITISH ISLES 
“I noticed that one of the men to whom I was intro- 
“ai noutist dot w\n ov do men to hu:m ai woz intro¬ 
duced to-day explained that he was a Scotchman, not 
dju:st todei iks'pleind dot hi: woz o skotfmon, not 
an Englishman. Wasn’t that rather a strange thing to 
on igglifmon. woznt dxt ra:5or o streindj pig to 
say?” asked Storm. “You may think so, but that is 
sei?” a:skt sto:m. “ju: mei pigk sou , hot diet iz 
only because you’re a stranger. People in foreign 
ounli bi'koz juor o streindp. pi:p/ in jorin 
countries speak about this country as England and the 
k\ntriz spi:k obaut dis k\ntri oz igglond ond do 
isle = island 
people as English, and know nothing about the existence 
pi:pl oz iyglif, 9nd nou n\pig o'bant di ig'zistons 
of other nations in the British Isles, but there are 
ov \do neifonz in do britif ailz , bot deo 
really four different countries, England, Wales, Scot- 
rioti jo: difront k\nlriz , igglond , weilz , skot- 
land, and Ireland, with four different nations, the 
lond , ond aiolond , wid jo: dijront neifonz , di 
English, the Welsh, the Scotch, and the Irish. In Wales, 
iyglif, do welf, do skotf, ond di aiorif. in weilz. 
404 
The Forty-Third (43rd) Chapter. 
Scotland, and Ireland you will find the Celts, the people 
skatland, and aialand ju: wil faind da kelts, da pi:pl 
to whom all four countries used to belong before the 
ta hu:m o:l fa: kxntriz ju:st ta bi'lay bi'fa: da 
Romans and, later on, the Saxons came to England.” 
roumanz and, leitar on, da saeksnz keim tu iygland” 
Storm: “I remember our teacher telling us that the 
sto:m: “ai ri'membar ana ti:tfa teliy as dat da 
country belonged to the Celts until their enemies took 
k\ntri bi'layd ta da kelts a n'til dear enimiz tuk 
it away from them; but I must say that I never knew 
it a'wei from dam; bat ai mast sei dat ai neva nju: 
that the Celts exist as a nation, or rather, as three 
dat da kelts ig'zist az a neifan, a: ra:da, az pri: 
exist = be 
nations.” “You had better never say that to a Celt,” said 
neifanz .” “ju: had beta neva sei daet tu a keltsed 
Marshall, laughing, “for he would not like to hear that 
ma:Jal, la:fiy, “fa hi: wad not laik to hia dat 
anybody, even a stranger, did not know of the existence 
enibadi, i:van a slreindp, did not nou av di ig zistans 
of the Celts. All Celts are rather proud that they are 
av da kelts . a:l kelts a: ra:da praud dat dei a: 
Celts. The Scotchman to whom you spoke to-day was 
kelts. da skatfman ta hu:m ju: spouk ta'dei waz 
proud that he was a Scotchman; that was the reason 
praud dat hi: waz a skatfman; daet waz da ri:zn 
why he mentioned that he was a Scotchman, and not 
hwai hi: menfand dat hi: waz a skatfman, and not 
405 
Chapter Forty-Three (43). 
but little = very 
little 
anything else = 
any other thing 
an Englishman.” “I am afraid,” said Storm, “that I 
dix iyglifmdn.” “ai om d'freid” sed sto:m f “ddt ai 
know but little about Scotland. I have read many 
nou bdt litl o'baut skotlond. ai hdv red meni 
funny stories about Scotchmen, but the stories that I 
f\ni sto:riz o'baut skotf mon , bdt do sto:riz dot ai 
know about them do not tell me anything about 
nou o'baut 6dm du: not tel mi: enipiy o'baut 
Scotland.” 
skothnd .” 
“The stories will not tell you anything about the 
“3d sto:riz wit not tel ju: enipiy o'baut do 
Scotch either,” Marshall replied, “for most of those 
skotf aido” ma:fol ri'plaid, “fo moust ov douz 
stories give the idea that the Scotch love money more 
sto.riz giu di ai'dio dot do skotf Iav m\ni mo: 
than anything else in the world. You’re told that they 
don enipir) els in do wo:ld. juo tould dot dei 
will do anything to get money, and that they don’t like 
wil du: enipiij to get m\ni, ond Sot dei dount laik 
spending it. This, however, is not so. The Scotchman 
spendiy it. dis t hau'evo, iz not sou. do skotfmon 
takes good care of his money; he is very careful with 
teiks gud keor ov hiz m\ni; hi: iz veri keoful wid 
money; but that is all. I think there must be many 
m\ni; bdt daet iz o:l. ai piyk ded mdst bi: meni 
other people who are careful with their money, and 
Add pi-pi hu: a: ked/ul wid ded /hath', dnd 
406 
The Forty-Third (43rd) Chapter. 
who look twice at a penny before spending it. I myself 
hu: luk twais ot o peni bi'fo: spendiy it. ai mai'self 
do not waste money, spending it unnecessarily, and I 
du: not weist m\ni, spendiy it a n'nesisoriii, ond ai 
am sure that you don’t waste your money either.” 
om Juo 5dt ju: dount weist jo: m\ni aibo” 
Storm: “No, I am rather careful with my money. — 
sto:m: “nou , ai dm ra:bd kedjul wib mai m\ni. — 
I should like to hear a little about these three nations. 
ai fdd laik id hidr o litl d'baut bi:z pri: neifdnz. 
Will you tell me about them?” “I shall be only too 
wit ju: tel mi: d'baut bdm?” “ai Jot bi: ounli tu: 
pleased to do so,” Marshall replied. “To begin with 
pli:zd td du: sou” ma:fdl ri'plaid. “td bi'gin wib 
Wales, it has had English kings for about 700 
weilz, it hdz hxd iyglif kiyz for d'baut sevn hAndrod 
years. When the country was conquered by Edward 
jidz. hwen bd k\ntri WdZ koykdd bai edwdd 
the First, who was then king of England, the Welsh 
bd fo:st, hu: WdZ ben kiy dv iyglond , bo welf 
told him that they would never accept a king who had 
tould him bdt bei wdd nevdr ok'sept o kiy hu: hod 
not been born in their own country and did not speak 
not bi:n bo:n in beor oun kxntri ond did not spi:k 
their language. So Edward called the most important 
bed lxygwid$. sou edwod ko:ld bd moust im'po:iont 
men of Wales to the Castle of Carnarvon and told them 
mqn dv weilz td bd ka:sl dv kd'na:von dnd tould bom 
She bears, 
she bore, 
she has born 
[be?z t bo: t bo:n]. 
be born = come 
into the world 
407 
Chapter Forty-Three (43). 
prince = son of 
the king 
old,, older, oldest 
but: old, elder, 
eldest (about 
sisters and 
brothers) 
harmony = peace 
that he would with pleasure give them a king who had 
dot hi: wod wid plep giv dom a kiy hu: hdd 
been bom in Wales and could not speak one Word of 
bi:n bom in wcilz ond kud not spi:k w\n wo:d ov 
English. They were very pleased with this and promised 
igglif- foi Wd: ver i pli:zd wid dis ond promist 
to accept such a king. Their surprise, however, was 
tu ok'sept s\tf 9 kiy. deo so'praiz , hau'evo , W9Z 
great when Edward’s first-born son, who had been born 
greit hwen edw9dz fd:stbo:n s\n, hu: hdd bi:n bom 
at the castle a few days before, and who was to be 
ot do ka:sl o fju: deiz bi'fo:, ond hu: woz to bi: 
king after Edward, was brought in to them. But they 
kit) a:ftor edwod, woz bro:t in to dom. bot dei 
had to agree with the King that he had kept his 
hied tu o'gri: wid do kiy dot hi: hod kept hiz 
promise, as the little prince really had been born in 
promis, oz do litl prins rioli hoed bi:n bom in 
Wales and could not speak one word of English, and 
weilz ond kud not spi:k w\n wo:d ov iyglif , ond 
so they accepted him. Since that time the eldest son 
sou dei ok'septid him. sins dset taim di eldist s\n 
of the English king has always been called the Prince 
ov di iyglif kiy hoz o:lwoz bim ko:ld do prins 
of Wales, and the Welsh and the English have lived 
ov weilz , ond do welf ond di iyglif hov livd 
together in harmony. 
to'gedor in ha.moni. 
4 08 
The Forty-Third (43rd) Chapter. 
“It has been much more difficult for the English and 
“it hoz bi:n mxtf mo: dilikolt fa di iyglif and 
the Scotch to live in peace and harmony with each 
do shot/ to liv in pi:s ond ha:moni wid i:tf 
other, and the two countries have had the same kings 
Ado , ond do tu: k\ntriz hov hied do seim kiyz 
for no more than 300 years. For many hundred 
jo noil mo: don pri: h\ndrod jioz. fo meni h\ndrod 
years the two nations were enemies, and the Scotch 
jioz do tu: neifonz wo:r enimiz, ond do skotj 
had just as great a hatred of the English as the English 
hod dpstoz greit o heitrid ov di iyglif zz di iyglif 
of the Scotch. But the two countries have now become 
ov do skotj. bot do tu: k\ntriz hov nau bi'kxm 
the best of friends, and the existence of the old hatred 
do best ov jrendz , ond di ig'zistons ov di ould heitrid 
has been forgotten. As Queen Elizabeth of England had 
hoz bi:n fogotn. oz kwi:n i'lizobop ov iyglond hied 
no children, the people in both countries agreed that 
nou t/ildron , do pi:pl in boup kxntriz o'gri.d dot 
it would be best for England and Scotland to be joined 
it wod bi: best for iyglond ond skotlond to bi: dpind 
together under one king. James the Sixth of Scotland 
to'gedor xndo wxn kiy. dpimz do siksp ov skotlond 
became James the First of England. Since that time 
bi'keim dpimz do fo:st ov iyglond. sins diet taim 
the two countries have been joined together and have 
do tu: kxntriz hov bi:n dpind to'gedo ond hov 
409 
Chapter Forty-Three (43). 
would (here) = 
used to 
hurry = go 
quickly 
He hides, he hid, 
he has hidden 
[haidz, hid , hidn]. 
had the same kings. 
hoed do seim kiyz. 
“Until then the English and the Scotch had often 
“ ah' til den di iyglif to skotf hdd o:fn 
fought each other. In the early wars the Scotch would 
fo:t i:if a dd. in di 9:li wo:z dd skotj wdd 
send soldiers to the nearest English towns, where they 
send souldpz id dd nidrist iyglif taunz 9 hwed dei 
would do as much damage as possible. Sometimes the 
Wdd du: dz m\tf deemidj dz posdbL s\mtaimz dd 
damage was very great. Houses were set on fire and 
dtvmid$ wdz veri greit . hauziz wd: set on faid dnd 
quite destroyed, so that not one stone was left upon 
kwait di'stroid , sou dot not w\n sioun woz left d'pon 
another. The Scotch only came to destroy houses and 
d'n\do . do skotj ounli keim id di'stroi hauziz dnd 
fields and to take the cows and sheep of the English. 
fi:ldz dnd id teik dd kauz dnd fi:p dv di iyglif- 
Having done that, they hurried back as quickly as 
hteviy d\n diet , dei hxrid beek dz kwikli dz 
possible to Scotland to hide in the mountains, where 
posdbl id skotlond id haid in do mauntinz , hwedr 
it would be difficult to find them. They knew that the 
it wdd bi: difikolt id jaind dom. dei nju: dot di 
English would hurry after them, but very often they 
iyglif wdd h\ri a:/Id ddm , bdt veri o:fn dei 
were so well hidden that the English had to give up 
Wd: sou wet hidn ddt di iyglif heed id giv a p 
410 
The Forty-Third (43rd) Chapter. 
trying to find them. 
traiig to faind 5dm. 
“I have told you about the Scotch coming into England, 
"ai hdv tould ju: o'baut dd skotf k\miy intu iyglond, 
but the English were no better. They went just as often 
bdt di iyglif wd: nou betd. dei went d$\st oz o:fn 
into Scotland and did the same damage to the Scotch. 
intd skothnd dnd did dd seim dtemidj td dd skotf. 
Sometimes the English even sent large armies into 
sxmtaimz di iyglif i:vdn sent la:d$ a:miz intd 
Scotland. Once, the English went into Scotland with 
skothnd. w\ns , di iyglif went into skotlond wid 
an army of 150 000 men. The Scotch got 
on a:mi ov w\n h\ndrod ond fifti pauzond men. do skotf got 
together an army of good soldiers, but they were few 
to'gedor on a:mi ov gud souldpz , bdt dei wo: fju: 
in comparison with the English. The two armies met 
in kom'paerisn wid di iyglif• do tu: a:miz met 
at Bannockburn, where a great battle was fought. The 
ot bxnok'bom, hweor o greit baetl woz fo:t. do 
Scotch soldiers were very brave; they were not afraid 
skotf souldpz wo: veri breiv; dd wo: not o'jreid 
of meeting and fighting against a much larger army. 
ov mi:lig ond faitig o'geinst o m\tf la:dpr a:mi. 
At the end of the day, the English either lay dead on 
ot di end ov do dei f di iyglif aido lei ded on 
the field of battle or were hurrying back to England 
do fi:ld ov boetl o: wo: h\riig b&k tu iyglond 
He meets, he met, 
he has met 
\mi:ts 9 met , met). 
411 
Chapter Forty-Three (43). 
as quickly as their legs would carry them. 
az kwikli dz dea legz wad kxri dam. 
“At one time, many European nations had Scotchmen 
“at w\n taim , meni juara'pian neijanz hxd skatfman 
in their armies, because they were such brave soldiers, 
in dear a:miz , bi'koz dei wa: s\tf breiv souldpz, 
but now that England and Scotland have the same king, 
bat nau dat iygland and skotland hxv da seim kiy, 
the Scotch soldiers fight side by side with the English 
da skotf souldpz fait said bai said wid di iyglif 
in the British army. And now I had better tell you 
in da britij a:mi. and nau ai had beta tel ju: 
something about the Irish. 
s\mpiy a'bant di aiarif . 
“Ireland is different from Wales and Scotland in many 
,( aialand iz difrant fram weilz and skotland in meni 
things, as a comparison between the Irish and the other 
piyz , az a kam'pxrisn bi'twim di aiarif and di \da 
two nations will soon show. While it has been rather 
tu: neijanz wil sum Jon. hwail it haz bi:n ra:dar 
easy for England, Wales, and Scotland to work together, 
i:zi far iygland , weilz , and skotland la wa:k tageda , 
there have been great difficulties in arriving at peace 
dea hav bi:n greit difikaltiz in a'rawiy at pi:s 
and harmony between the Irish and the English. One 
and ha:mani bi'twim di aiarif and di iyglif • w\n 
reason is that the Irish live in an island of their own, 
ri:zn iz dot di aiarif liu in an ailand av dear oun , 
412 
The Forty-Third (43rd) Chapter. 
while the English, the Scotch, and the Welsh live 
hwail di iyglif, do skotf , ond do welf liv 
together in another island. Then we must also remem- 
to'gedor in onAdor ailond. den wi: most o:lsou ri'mem- 
ber that most of the Irish are Catholics, while most 
bo ddt moust ov di aiorif a: kxpoliks, hwail moust 
of the people of the other countries are Protestants. 
9V d9 pi:pl 9V di Add k\ntriz a: protistdnls . 
I don’t think that we English understand the Irish very 
aidount piyk d9t wi: iyglif a ndo'staend di ahrif veri 
well, and we have not always been particularly kind 
wel , 9nd wi: hov not o:lw9Z bi:n po'tikjuloli kaind 
to them. All this has meant that some of the Irish, 
h dom. o:l dis h9z ment d9t s\m 9V di ahrif , 
particularly those in the southern part which is called 
po'tikjuloli douz in d9 SAdon pa:t hwitf iz ko:ld 
Eire, have not been very satisfied with the English. 
eoro t h9V not bi:n veri s&tisfaid wid di iyglif- 
You will understand, however, that it is almost im- 
ju: wil a ndjstvend, hauevo , dot it iz o.lmousl ; m- 
possible to satisfy people unless you understand them. 
'pos9bl to s&tis/ai pi:pl An tes ju: a ndo'staend dom. 
Scotland and Wales send representatives to the British 
skotlond ond weilz send reprVzenhtivz to do britif 
Parliament in London, but since 1922 Eire 
pa.hmont in lAndon , bAt sins naintim twenii'tu: eoro 
has had a parliament of her own, and she no longer 
hoz hwd o pa.hmont ov ho:r oun f ond fi: nou hygo 
particularly = 
especially 
unless — except if 
413 
Chapter Forty-Three (43). 
sends representatives to London. Northern Ireland has 
sendz repri'zentdtivz to l\nddn . no:6on aiolond hsez 
a parliament of its own, but, at the same time, sends 
o pa.lomont ov its oun , b\t, ot do seim faim , sendz 
representatives to London. When we speak about all 
repri'zentdtivz td l\ndon. hwen wi: spi:k d'baut o:l 
four countries together, we usually call them either 
fo: k\ntriz td'gedd , wi: ju:$udli ko:l 6dm aidd 
the British Isles or Great Britain and Eire (Ireland). 
6d britif ailz o: greit britdn dnd eoro (aiolond). 
There you have a few facts about the Welsh, the 
bed ju: heev d fju: faekls d'baut 6d welf , 6d 
Scotch, and the Irish. Are you satisfied with that? If 
skotf , dnd 5i aidrif. a: ju: ssetisfaid wid beet? if 
not, I promise to tell you more some other time.” 
not , ai promis td tel ju: mo: s\m a 6o taim” 
WORDS: 
British Isles 
belong 
existence 
exist 
proud 
story 
careful 
waste 
not... either 
414 
EXERCISE A. 
Although Storm knew that the British — had — to 
the Celts once, he had never thought of the — of three 
nations of Celts in the British Isles. The Scotch are 
very — that they are Celts, but many of the funny — 
that are told about them are made by the Scotch 
themselves. The stories tell us that the Scotch love 
money, but they are only — with it and do not — it by 
buying things —. But it is not the Scotch alone who 
are like that; there are many other people who do not 
waste their money unnecessarily —. In our days the 
The Forty-Third (43rd) Chapter. 
English, the Welsh, and the Scotch live in peace and 
— together, but several hundred years ago there was 
great — between the nations. The Welsh were the first 
to make peace with the English; the two nations were 
— together, and the English king called his — son the 
— of Wales. The eldest son of King Edward the First 
was — at the Castle of Carnarvon. The Scotch and the 
English continued to send armies into each other’s 
countries to — the towns and do as much — as possible. 
Sometimes, after such a trip into England, the Scotch 
would 3run back and — in the mountains, but often they 
— the English armies and fought great battles with 
them. The Scotch soldiers were very —, and after the 
Battle of Bannockburn the English army, which was 
much bigger than the Scotch army, had to — back to 
England as fast as possible. No difficulties — between 
these three nations now. The — live in another island 
by themselves. It has been more difficult for England 
to — the Irish. If we make a — between the Irish and 
the Celts of Great Britain, we find that the Irish 
are —, while most of the- others are —. The Scotch live 
in —, and the Welsh live in —. Scotland and Wales 
send — to the British Parliament, but Eire was not 
— until she had her own parliament. You cannot expect 
people to be satisfied — they are met with kindness 
and understanding. 
EXERCISE B. 
As soon as Mr. Miller and the two young men came 
home, Wood wrote a letter to Storm telling him about 
the trip. Now we want you to write a letter as if you 
harmony 
hatred 
join 
elder 
eldest 
prince 
destroy 
bear 
bore 
born 
damage 
hide 
hid 
hidden 
meet 
met 
brave 
hurry 
Irish 
satisfy 
satisfied 
comparison 
Catholic 
Protestant 
representative 
Eire 
unless 
particularly 
southern 
Ireland 
rather 
unnecessarily 
415 
Chapter Forty-Three (43). 
were Wood. Please write the letter in such a way that 
you use all the words in the following list: steamer — 
sea — seasick — nice — train — restaurant — carriage 
— wine — cup — newspaper — look — window — 
station — family — carry — good-bye — teacher — 
taxi — remember. 
How to write a letter in English. 
At the top of the paper, in the right hand corner, write 
the address, the day of the month, and the year. For 
example: 
68, Victory Road, Ealing. 
August 4th, 19- 
You may write either 'August 4th’ or '4th August’, but 
you usually pronounce 'the fourth of August’. On the 
left hand side of the paper a little farther down, the 
words ‘Dear Storm’, followed by a comma [,1, begin the 
letter itself. This is the usual way of beginning a letter 
in English. If you write to a person whom you do not 
know very well, you first write the person’s name and 
address and under that the words: Dear Sir, or Dear 
Madam, for example: 
Mr. George Bentham, 
47, Nelson Road, Wimbledon. 
Dear Sir, 
Notice that the number of the house comes before the 
name of the street. If you wish to send greetings to 
somebody else, too, for instance to a person called 
John, you can do so with the words: “Please remember 
me to John.” At the end of the letter, it is most com- 
416 
The Forty-Third (43rd) Chapter. 
mon to write ‘Yours sincerely’ [sirishli], followed 
by your name. If you write to a person whom you do 
not know well, you may write ‘Yours faithfully’ l/cip- 
fuli] or ‘Yours truly’ [tru.li], and then your name. 
Now you know enough about writing letters in English 
to write the letter from Wood to Storm. 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
If we want to express that something belongs to some¬ 
body, we may add an -s to the name of the person to 
whom it belongs. For example: the boy’s pencil. When 
this -s is added to a noun, we say that the noun is in 
the genitive \djenitiv]. We notice that there is an 
apostrophe [d'postrdji], which looks like this [’]; it is 
put either before or after the -s, to make it different 
from the plural -s. 
In the singular the apostrophe is always put before 
the -s. For example: the boy’s pencil, the baby’s doll, 
the child’s ball. In the plural there are two ways of 
making the genitive. Nouns that already have a plural 
-s do not add an extra -s in the genitive, but only add 
the apostrophe. Examples: the boys’ pencils, the babies’ 
dolls. So we see there is a difference between the 
singular and the plural in writing: the boy’s pencils, the 
boys’ pencils; but to the ear there is no difference. 
Nouns, however, that do not end in -s in the plural, 
have the apostrophe and the -s just like the genitive in 
the singular. Examples: the men’s hats, the children’s 
balls. The genitive -s is pronounced in the same way 
as the plural -s: the dog’s [ dogz ] nose, the horse’s 
[ho:siz] head. 
417 
Chapter Forty-Three (43). 
The s-genitive is used to express that something belongs 
to a person or an animal . But we may express the idea 
of the genitive in another way, too: John’s father, or: 
the father of John. If it is not a person or an animal that 
something belongs to, we use the word ‘of’ to express 
the genitive: the roof of the house was high; the leaves 
of the trees had fallen. 
Perhaps you have noticed that we speak, for example, 
of two weeks’ holiday or of a day’s work. When we 
speak of a measure of time, the s-genitive is used. 
There is also another way in which the s-genitive is 
used. People speak of shopping at Selfridge’s. It looks 
as if a word should have followed Selfridge’s, and 
really the word ‘shop’ should have followed; but people 
are so used to hearing the name that everybody knows 
what is meant. In the same way we speak of having 
dinner at your uncle’s, that is, at your uncle’s house, or 
of dining at your brother’s, etc. 
Questions: 
What may we add to the name of a person to show that 
something belongs to that person? .. . What takes place 
in the genitive if a noun' already has a plural -s? 
What is the genitive plural of the words: woman, 
child, boy, lady, girl? . .. How do we express the 
genitive of the noun if it is not a person or an animal 
that something belongs to? ... May we use only the s- 
genitive when we speak of persons? ... 
418 
Chapter Forty-Four (44). 
The Forty-Fourth (44th) Chapter. 
ENGLISH MONEY 
Marshall and Storm have been working hard the whole 
ma:fdl and sto:m hav bi:n wa:kiy ha:d da houl 
morning and are now waiting for the lunch hour. A 
mo:niy dnd a: nau weitiy fa da l\nf aua . a 
few of the clerks have lunch from twelve to one, but 
fju: au 6a kla.ks haev l\nf fram twelv ta w\n, bat 
all the others from one to two. Suddenly, the clock in 
o:l di \daz fram w\n ta tu:. s\dnli 9 da klok in 
the office strikes one. “I knew it had struck half past 
di ofis straiks w\n. “ai nju: it had strxk ha:f pa:st 
twelve, but I had begun to think it would never reach 
twelv , bat ai had bi'g\n ta piyk it wad neva ri:tf 
one o’clock,” says Marshall. 
w\n a'kloksez ma.fal. 
The two young men now got up, went to the restaurant 
da tu: j\y men nau got a p 9 went ta da restaro.y 
where they usually had their lunch, and sat down. 
hwea dei ju:$uali haed dea /ah/, and saet daun. 
They at once began to look at the menu, a long list of 
dei at w\ns bi'gaen ta luk at da menjua lay list av 
the different sorts of food that one could get. A little 
da difrant so:ts av fu:d dat w\n kad get. a litl 
later, they saw the young lady who served at their 
leita , dei so: da j\y leidi hu: sa:vd at dea 
He strikes> 
he struck, 
he has struck 
[straiks , str\k, 
str\k]. 
419 
Chapter Forty-Four (44). 
table, coming to take their order. “Here comes the 
teibl, kxmiy ta tcik dear o:da. “hia kxmz da 
waitress,” said Storm; “I’m glad to see her, for I’m very 
weitris," sed sh:m; “aimglxd la si: ha:, far aim veri 
hungry to-day.” 
hxygri iadei” 
place = put 
They ordered their lunch, and in two or three minutes 
dei o:dad dea l^nf, and in tu: a pri: minits 
the waitress was back again, carrying the food on a 
da weilris waz bxk a'gein , kaeriiy da fu:d an a 
tray. One of the most important things on the 
trei. wxn av da moust im'pa.tant piyz an da 
waitress’s tray was a big pot of tea. Storm had now 
weitrisiz trei waz a big pat av ti:. sta:m had nan 
learned to drink tea as often as an Englishman. The 
la:nd la driyk ti: az a:fn az an iyglifman. da 
waitress placed the pot of tea and the other things on 
weitris pleist da pat av ti: and di xda pirjz an 
the table and went away. Although the food had been 
da teibl and went awei. a:l'dou da fu:d had bi:n 
placed on the table, Storm continued to look at the 
pleist an da teibl, sta:m kan'tinju:d ta Ink at da 
prices on the menu. “I thought you said you were 
praisiz an da menju:. (, ai pa:t jn: sed ju: wa: 
hungry, but you seem to be much more interested in 
hxygri, bat ju: si:m ta bi: mxtf ma:r intristid in 
the menu than in the food itself,” Marshall said to him, 
da menju: dan in da fu:d itself ,” ma:fal sed ta him. 
420 
The Forty-Fourth (44th) Chapter. 
smiling. Storm replied that the prices interested him 
smailiy. sto:m ri'plaid dot do praisiz intristid him 
a great deal, and finished by asking Marshall to tell a great deal = 
9 greit did, dnd finift bai a:skiy ma:fdl td tel very much 
him something about English money and coins. He 
him s\mpiy d'baut iyglif m\ni ond koinz. hi: 
explained that these things were difficult for a stranger 
iks'pleind ddt di:z piyz u)d: difikdlt far 9 streindp 
to get used to, because nearly the whole world uses the 
t9 get ju:st tu, bi'koz nioli 69 houl u)9:ld ju:ziz 69 
decimal system. “Even the Americans, who use the 
desimdl sistim . ,( i:von di o'merikonz, hu: ju:z di 
English system of weights and measures, have their 
iyglif sistim 9V weits 9nd mepz, haev bed 
dollar which is equal to a hundred cents,” said Storm. 
dolo hwitf iz i:kwal tu 9 h\ndr9d sentssed sto:m. 
“I always have great trouble in understanding the 
“at o:lw9Z haev greit tr\bl in Ando'staendiy 69 
prices in the shops in London. You have more than 
praisiz in to fops in l\nddn. ju: haev mo: ton 
one way of saying the same thing, at least when it 
w\n wei 9 V seiiy 69 seim piy, 9 t li:st hwen it 
comes to money.” 
k\mz t 9 m\ni 
“You must know quite a lot of these things already, 
"ju: most nou kwait 9 lot ov di:z piyz o:l'redi. 
seeing that you have been here almost a month. But I 
sidy dot ju: hov bi:n hior o:lmoust 9 m\np. bot ai 
seeing that 
421 
Chapter Forty-Four (44). 
think it will be better if I explain to you all the details 
pigk it wit bi: betdr if ai iks'plein id ju: o:l id di. teilz 
of our monetary system, especially as you seem to have 
av aud m\nitari sisiim , ispejali dz ju: si:m id hsev 
so much trouble in finding out what things really 
sou m\tf trAbl in jaindiy aut hwot pigz rhli 
cost,” Marshall told his friend. “I should be glad if you 
kost” ma:Jdl iould hiz frend . "ai Jdd bi: glced if ju: 
would give me all the details about English money. 
wdd giv mi: o:l dd di:teilz obaut igglif mAni. 
Before you start, however, you had better pour me 
bi'fo: ju: sta:t, haueva , ju: had beta pa: mi: 
another cup of tea,” Storm said. 
an Ada kAp av sto :m sed. 
Some of the tea went on the table and over the edge 
s\m av da ti: went on da teibl and ouva di ed$ 
of the table on to the floor. Marshall said, “I’m sorry, 
av da teibl on to da jlo:. ma:fal sed , “aim sori , 
I wasn't very careful, but it doesn't matter so much as 
ai woznt veri keoful , bat it dAznt mxla sou mAtf az 
there is no cloth on the table, and the floor isn't very 
daz nou klop on da teibl , and da jlo:r iznt veri 
clean. If you want a restaurant where they have cloths 
kli:n. if ju: wont a restarorg hwea dei haw klops 
on the tables and clean floors, you must pay more for 
on da teiblz and kli:n \lo:z , ju: mast pei mo: ja 
your meals,” he continued laughing. "But if you will 
jo: mi:lz" hi: kan'tinju.d la:jig. “bat if ju: wil 
422 
The Forty-Fourth (44th) Chapter. 
pass me the sugar, I will start. I like a lot of sugar in 
pa:s mi: do fugd , ai wil sta:t. ai laik a lot dv fugor in 
my tea, in my coffee — in everything, in fact. I love 
mai ti: 9 in mai kofi — in evripig , in jxkt. ai Iav 
sweet things.” Storm told him that he never took sugar 
swi:t pig 2 ” sto:m tould him ddt hi: nevd tuk fugor 
in tea or coffee, because he didn’t like sweet things. 
in ti: 0 : kofi 9 bVkoz hi: didnt laik swi:t pig 2 . 
In fact, he didn’t like anything that was full of sugar. 
in fxkt , hi: didnt laik enipig dot wdz ful ov fugd . 
Marshall began by explaining that there are pounds, 
ma:fdl bi'gxn bai ikspleinig ddt deor a: paundz , 
shillings, pence, and farthings in the English monetary 
Jiligz , pens , and fa:digz in di igglif mAnilori 
system. “A pound,” he continued, “is divided into 
sistim . “a paund ,” hi: kontinju:d 9 “iz di'vaidid intd 
twenty shillings, a shilling into twelve pence, and a 
twenti filigz, a filig intd twelv pens , and a 
penny into four farthings. At one time a pound was 
peni intd jo: ja:digz. a/ WAn taim a paund woz 
always a gold coin, called a sovereign because the 
o:lwoz a gould koin , ko:ld a sovrin bi'koz do 
king’s head was to be found on one side of it. There 
kiyz hed woz to bi: faund on w\n said ov it. deo 
was a ten shilling coin, too, also made of gold, that was 
woz a ten filig koin , tu: t o.lsou ineid ov gould, dot woz 
in fact = in 
reality 
sovereign = king 
called a half-sovereign. In nearly every country of the 
ko:ld 0 ha: f sovrin. in nioli evri k\ntri ov do 
423 
Chapter Forty-Four (44). 
American Indian 
world three metals were used for coins before the war 
Wd:ld pri: metlz wo: ju:zd fo koinz bi'fo: do wo:r 
of 1914—1918. Gold had the greatest 
ov nainti.n fo:ti:n to nainti.n eiti:n. gould heed do greilist 
value of the three metals that were used for money, 
veelju: ov to pri: metlz dot wo: ju:zd f 9 m\ni 9 
&nd silver was next in value. Silver is the sort of metal 
9nd silv9 u)9z nekst in veelju:. silv9r iz 69 so:t 9V metl 
my parents' forks and spoons are made of," Marshall 
mai peoronts fo:ks 9nd spu:nz a: meid ov 9 " ma:/9l 
explained. “The third metal was copper, a metal of a 
iks'pleind. “do p9:d metl W9Z kop9 , 9 metl 9 V 9 
red colour. Copper is the same colour as an American 
red kslo. kop9r iz 69 seim k\lor 9Z 9n omerikon 
Indian. Nowadays, however, it would be very difficult to 
indj9n. nauodeiz, hau'evo 9 it W9d bi: veri difik9lt t9 
find a gold coin; paper money is used instead. In Eng- 
faind 9 gould koin; peip9 m\ni iz ju:zd iristed . in in¬ 
land we use a pound note and a ten shilling note instead 
ghnd wi: ju:z 9 paund nout 9nd 9 ten filiy nout in'sted 
of the gold sovereign and half-sovereign. Until some 
9 V bd gould sovrin ond ha:fsovrin. \n'til s\m 
time after the war of 1939—1945 
taim a:ft 9 do wo:r 90 nainti:n pd:ti nain to nainti.n fo:ti faiv , 
we had coins that people spoke of and thought of as 
wi: heed koinz dot pi-pi spouk ov ond po:t ov oz 
silver coins. In reality, we had no coins in England 
silvo koinz. in ri'&liti , wi: heed nou koinz in iyglond 
424 
The Forty-Fourth (44th) Chapter. 
that were made of silver only; we had no coins of 
dat wa: meid av silvar ounli; wi: hved noil koinz av 
any sort or size that were made of pure metals. Less 
eni so:t a: saiz dat wa: meid av pjua mellz . les 
than half of the metal of the so-called silver coins was 
dan ha:f av da metl av da souka.ld silva kainz waz 
silver. However, in order to pay America in silver some 
silva. haiieva y in a:da ta pei a'merika in silva s\m 
of the money we owe her, we changed instead to a 
av da m\ni wi: oil ha: y wi: lfeind$d in'sled lu. a 
mixture of copper and nickel. The old copper coins, 
miksljar av kapar and nikl. di ould kapa kainz , 
however, have not been changed and are still the same 
haueva , hav nal bi:n tfcindjd and a: stil da seim 
as they were, made of a mixture of copper and some 
az dei wa: y meid av a mikstfar av kapar and s\m 
other metal. The world is full of paper money, and it 
a da metl. da wa:ld iz ful av peipa m\ni y and it 
is hardly possible to find a coin of any real value. It 
iz ha:dli pasabl ta faind a kain av eni rial vtelju:. it 
is not very often that coins are pure; they’re mostly 
iz not veri o:fn dat kainz a: pjua; dea moustli 
mixtures of at least two metals. Now I will tell you 
mikst/az av at li:st tu: metlz. nau ai wil tel ju: 
about the English coins and at the same time show 
a'baut di iyglif kainz and at da seim taim foil 
you what they look like, for I have some in my pocket.” 
ju: hwat dei Ink laik y jar ai hwv s\m in mai pakit .” 
425 
Chapter Forty-Four (44). 
a half-crown = 
two shillings 
and sixpence 
as to - about 
Marshall put his hand in his trouser pocket and brought 
ma.fol put hiz found in hiz trauzo pokil dnd bro:t 
out a number of coins. He showed Storm four copper 
aut a nxmbor dv koinz. hi: fond sh:m jo: kopd 
coins: a farthing which is a quarter of a penny; a half- 
koinz: a I a: dig hwitf iz a kwo.tor ov a peni; a hei- 
penny; a penny; and a threepenny bit. He also had four 
pni; a peni; dnd a prepdni bit . hi: o.lsou foud fo:r 
of the new coins: a sixpence; a shilling; a two-shilling 
dv id nju: koinz: a sikspons; a filig; '<> tu: filig 
piece (a florin); and a half-crown. “We used to have a 
pi:s (d florin); ond a 'ha:f kraun. “wi: ju:st Id fovv a 
crown, too,” said Marshall, “but the size of the coin 
kraun, tu:” sed ma.fol, “bot do saiz ov do koin 
was too great.” “That is all quite easy to understand,” 
woz tu: greit.” “dxt iz o:l kwail i:zi tu \nddsliund 
Storm told him, “but will you also explain to me the 
sto:m tould him, “bot wit ju: o:lsou iks plein to mi: do 
different ways in which people give prices, for some- 
difront weiz in hwitf pi:pl giv praisiz, fo s.\/n- 
times when I hear a price, I don’t know how much it 
taimz hwen ai hior a prais , ai dount nou hau m\tf it 
is, and, consequently, I am in doubt as to how much I 
iz, ond, konsikwontli, ai om in daut az /a hau m\tf ai 
have to pay.” “I shouldn’t like you to be in doubt about 
hiev to pei .” ,( ai fudnt laik ju: to bi: in daut d'baut 
the price,” Marshall replied. “Now I will mention all 
do prais ” ma.fdl ri'plaid, “nau ai wit menfdn o:l 
426 
The Forty-Fourth (44th) Chapter. 
the different ways in which we give prices in writing 
do difrant weiz in hwitf wi: giv praisiz in raitig 
and in speaking. Five pounds is written £5. The letter 
and in spi:ki?j. faiv paundz iz riin ... da leta 
£ stands for the Latin word 'libra* or pound. Five 
. . stcendz fa da Lvtin wa:d 'laibra' o: pound . faiv 
shillings is written 5s. or 5/-, but fivepence is written 
filigz iz ritn . . o: . . , bat faifpans iz ritn 
5d. The letter d stands for 'denarius* which is the Latin 
... da tela di: slivndz fa ‘di'nearias hwitf iz da helin 
word for an old Roman coin. Now, two figures that are 
wa:d far an ould rouman koin. nan , tu: figaz dal a: 
not connected by 'and* mean pence and farthings. If 
not kanektid bai 'vend' mi:n pens and fa.digz. if 
I say 'five-three*, I mean fivepence three farthings, and 
aisei ‘faiv-pri:\ ai mi:n faifpans pri: fa.digz , and 
this is written 5%d. Two figures connected by ‘and’ 
dis iz riin . . . tu: figaz kanektid bai ‘vend' 
mean shillings and pence, so that if I say five-and- 
mi:n filigz and pens , sou dat if ai sei faiv-and- 
three, I mean five shillings and threepence; this is 
pri: t ai mi:n faiv filigz and prepans; dis iz 
written 5/3. When speaking of pounds, we express 
ritn . . . hwen spi:kig av paundz , wi: iks pres 
ourselves in this way: three pounds five-and-three, 
aua'selvz in dis ivei: pri: paundz faiv-and-pri :, 
which means three pounds five shillings and threepence, 
hwitf mi:nz pri: paundz faiv filigz and prepans , 
427 
Chapter Forty-Four (44). 
everybody else = 
any other person 
c/imv 
and is written £3/5/3.” 
and iz ritn ...” 
“Thank you, Marshall; it is all clear to me now, but I 
“pivrjk ju:, ma:fal; it iz o:l klia ta mi: nau, bat ai 
must say that I can’t see the advantage of having 
mast sei dat ai ka:nt si: di ad'va:ntid$ av hieviy 
pounds, shillings, pence, and farthings. It seems very 
paundz, Jiliyz, pens, and ja:diyz. it si:mz veri 
foolish to me, as shillings and pence would be quite 
fudif ta mi:, az JUiyz and pens wad bi: kwait 
enough.” “I might mention, Storm, that only English 
i'n\f." “ai mait menfan, sto:m, dat ounli irjglif 
business men would say £3/5/3. Nearly 
biznis men wad sei pri: paundz faiv-and-pri:. niali 
everybody else would prefer to express it 65/3. ” 
evribadi els wad pri'fa: tu iks'pres itsiksti'faivandpri:." 
“Then,” Storm answered, “there is no doubt that the 
“den," sto:m a:nsad, “daz nou daut dat di 
English system is foolish. In my country we always 
iyglif sistim iz fudif. in mai kxniri wi: odwaz 
say that it is foolish to do things in such a way that 
sei dat it iz fu:lif ta du: piyz in sxtf a wei dat 
they give extra work. But I think that we have spent 
dei giv ekslra wa:k. bat ai pirjk dat wi: hav spent 
enough time in talking about money. To finish my meal 
i'n\f taim in to:kiy abaut m\ni . ta finif mai mid 
I should like some cheese and another cup of tea. I find 
ai fad laik sam tji:z and anxda kxp av ti:. ai faind 
428 
The Forty-Fourth (44th) Chapter. 
that the cheese in England is very good, and I always 
dat da tji:z in iygland iz veri gud , dndai odivaz 
have a piece of bread and cheese for supper.” ‘‘Yes,” 
hxv a pi:s av bred dnd tfi:z fa s\pa” “jes,” 
said Marshall, “bread, a bit of cheese, and a good glass 
sed ma:fal, “bred, a bit av lfi:z, 9nd 9 gud gla:s 
of beer make a fine end to the day. I like a glass of' 
9V bh mcik 9 fain end ta da dei . ai laik 9 gla:s av 
beer before going to bed.” 
bia bi fa: gouiy ta bed.” 
EXERCISE A. 
When the clock — one, Storm and Marshall went out to 
lunch. Storm was interested in the prices on the — 
The — came with a — of tea and the food on a — and 
— it on the table. The American — is equal to one 
hundred — Sometimes Storm had much — in under¬ 
standing English money and prices, so he wanted 
Marshall to give him all the — of their monetary 
system. Some of Storm’s tea went over the — of the 
table on to the floor. There was no — on the table in 
the restaurant. Marshall asked Storm to — the sugar; 
he liked — things very much. Once, a pound was a — 
coin called a —. 
Spoons and forks are sometimes made of —. — has not 
so great a — as silver; it is red like an-. Nowadays 
most coins are not made of — metals. Marshall took 
several coins out of his —; there were four copper 
coins: a threepenny bit, a penny, a —, and a —. A- 
is equal to threepence. Two threepenny bits have the 
bit = (small) 
piece 
WORDS: 
strike 
struck 
menu 
waitress 
pot 
tray 
place (verb) 
dollar 
cent 
trouble 
detail 
edge 
cloth 
pass 
sweet 
gold 
sovereign 
429 
Chapter Forty-Four (44). 
half-sovereign 
silver 
copper 
value 
American 
Indian 
pure 
pocket 
halfpenny 
farthing 
threepenny 
bit 
florin 
half-crown 
crown 
doubt 
foolish 
cheese 
beer 
red 
Latin 
denarius 
order 
clear 
a great deal 
in fact 
nickel 
libra 
same value as a —.A — is equal to two shillings. One 
— is equal to two shillings and sixpence. Now and then 
Storm was in — about the prices in the shops. He found 
it — to have both pounds and shillings. Marshall and 
Storm liked bread and — and a glass of —. 
EXERCISE B. 
Answer these questions with full sentences: 
Did you learn any foreign language at school? ... Are 
you interested in football? . .. Did you play football at 
school? . . . Have you any brothers or sisters? . . . Where 
did you spend your last summer-holidays? . . . Did you 
travel by land or by sea? ... Was the weather good? ... 
Did you spend much money? ... Do you like to go to 
the theatre, or do you prefer to see a good picture? ... 
How do you like singing? . . . 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
Adjectives [wd$iktivz\ are words that say what things 
or persons are like. Examples: I have a big dog; he is 
often dirty; when he is clean , he is a nice dog. In these 
sentences ‘big’, ‘dirty’, ‘clean’, and ‘nice’ are adjectives, 
and each of these adjectives tells us something about the 
‘dog’, which is a noun. Other adjectives are: high, 
beautiful, kind, blue, good, bad, whole, big, great, and 
many others. 
Adjectives may be used to make comparisons. When 
used in this way, -er and -est are added to them. In 
the sentence, “My dog is cleaner than yours, but Henry’s 
430 
The Forty-Fourth (44th) Chapter. 
is the clean est of the three,” a comparison is made 
between the dogs. When -er is added to an adjective, 
we say that the adjective is in the comparative [karri'par- 
rat iu]\ when -est is added, the adjective is said to be 
in the superlative [sju:' pa:lativ\. 
There are several things to notice about the compara¬ 
tive and the superlative of adjectives. If an adjective 
already has an V as the last letter, only .-r and -st are 
added, for example: nice, nicer, nicest. 
Most adjectives that end in ‘y’ change ‘y* to ‘i* in the 
comparative and the superlative, for example: dirty, 
dirtier, dirtiest. 
In some adjectives of one syllable the last letter is 
written twice before -er or -est is added; for instance: 
big, bigger, biggest. 
Long adjectives do not add -er and -est, but comparison 
is expressed by the help of more and most: She is more 
beautiful than her sister, and the most beautiful girl I 
know. 
Some adjectives have special comparatives and super¬ 
latives. For example: good, better, best; many, more, 
most; much, more, most. 
Questions: 
What are adjectives? .. . Write some examples of adjec¬ 
tives. .. . What are the comparatives and the superla¬ 
tives of the following adjectives: warm, large, hot (add 
an extra -t), blue, red (add an extra -d), hard, kind, 
cheap, loud, good, many, much, early, dry, funny? . .. 
431 
Chapter Forty-Four (44). 
EXERCISE D. 
Write the following with the usual letters of the alphabet: 
l\ndon , di eitp ov o.gost. 
did wud , 
ai risi:vd jo: lelo dis mo:niy ond woz veri glwd to ri:d o'baut 
jo: trip houm. ai hov mist ju: o:l veri m\tf , is'pefoli do fo:sl 
deiz a:jto ju: left, ai jett kwait oloun in dis grcit siti , bot ai 
om hvepi to bi: eibl to tel ju: dot ai o.l'rcdi ji:l m\ij mo:r 
ot houm nau. do mein ri::n jo dis , ai nou , iz dot o j\y mien 
ot auor ojis bai do neim ov ma:Jol , od'redi on do jo:st dei 
ojod mi: o ru:m ot hiz peoronts haus. ai teik o:l mai mi:lz 
wid do ma:folz t ond dei o:l du: deo best to meik mi: ji:l dot 
ai rioli bi'loy to do fwmili. 
it iz iu: o:li to tel ju: m\tf o'baut mai wo:k; ai most non it 
o lift beto fo:st. ai hov bi:n pleist in do koris'pondons di'pa:i- 
mont , ond ju: kon \ndoslwnd dot ai felt o ra:dor inipo:tonl 
po:sn 9 hwen deo woz o letor in mai oun livygwid j tu a:nso 
o:l'redi on mai sekond dei ot di ojis. bot ai didnt ji:l ha:j 
sou im'podont hwen ai jaiind dot ai lucd lu a:sk o hxndrod 
slreindf kwestfonz in di a do di'padmonis in o:do to gel do 
rait injo'meifon o'baut do mivtor in mai leto — bi koz ai did 
not nou di irjglif wo:dz. 
po'hceps ju: wit bi: sou kaind oz to ko:l mai sistor on do 
telijoun ond a:sk ho: to send mi: som linin. fi: wit jaind 
o:l mai pirjz in do tfest ov dro:oz in mai ru:m. mai m\dor 
iz in do k\niri on holidi , ju: nou , ond ai dount nou hwedo 
mai sistor iz ot houm o: steiiy wid o go:l /rend, oz fi: o:fn 
d\z. bot ju: mei ko:l ho:r ot di ojis hweo fi: wo:ks. 
pli:z ri'membo mi: to braun ond misto milo. 
jo:z sin'sioli, 
sto:m 
432 
Chapter Forty-Five (45). 
The Forty-Fifth (45th) Chapter. 
A FOOTBALL MATCH 
One day in September, when the football season had 
w\n dei in sap'temba , Jvwen da futbj.l si:zn had 
begun, Marshall asked Storm if he would like to go 
big\n, ma:fdl a:skt stj.m if hi: wdd laik ta gou 
to a football match with him. “Are you doing-anything 
tn a futbj.l mcetf zvid him. “a: ju: du:iy enipiy 
else next Saturday, or is that day convenient to you?” 
els nekst scetddi . j:r iz dcet dei kanvi:njdnt tu ju:. ? ” 
Storm: “No, I have nothing else on, so that Saturday 
stj:m: “non, ai hdv ha pi] els an, sou dot scetadi 
afternoon will be quite convenient to me. I shall be 
a:fta'nu:n zvil bi: kzvait kan'vi :n jant tu mi:, ai fal bi: 
very pleased to go to the match with you. I wonder 
veri pli.zd ta gou ta da mcetf zvid ju:. ai WAndar 
if the kind of football we are going to see is the same 
if da kaind av futba:l zvi: a: gouiy ta si: iz da seim 
kind as we have at home, for I know that you have two 
kaind az zvi: Inez 1 at houm, far ai non dat ju: hcev tu: 
kinds of football in England.” Marshall: “Yes, we have 
kaindz av futbj.l in iygland ” mo:fal: “jes, zvi: hcez r 
two kinds of football. The game we are going to see 
tu: kaindz av futbj.l. da geim zvi: a: gouiy ta si: 
on Saturday is the one you know, so you will not have 
an scetadi iz da wau ju: nou, sou ju: zvil not hcev 
have nothing else 
on = have nothing 
else to do 
kind = sort 
12/1 
433 
Chapter Forty-Five (45). 
Rugby football 
any difficulty in following it. The other kind is called 
eni difikdlti in folouiy it. di Add kaind iz kj:ld 
Rugby after the famous school where it was first 
rxgbi a:ftd dd feimds skud hwedr it Wdz fd:st 
played.” Storm: “I have never seen any Rugby foot- 
pleid” sto:m: “ai hdv nevd si:n eni r\gbi fut- 
ball.” “Then you would not understand much of it, 
bo:l. m “den jn: wdd not Andd' stand niAtf dv it, 
for the rules of the game are quite different from those 
fd dd ru:lz dv dd geim a: kwait difrdnt frdm done 
of the kind of football you know. There are fifteen 
dv dd kaind dv futbo:l jn: nou. ded 'fiftirn 
players; they may carry the ball in their hands if they 
pleidz; dei met kari dd bo:I in dfd handz if dei 
like; and the ball itself is not round.” 
laik; dnd dd bod it'self iz not raund. ,y 
“I am very surprised,” Storm replied; “I have never 
“ai din veri sd'praizd”' sto:m ri'plaid ; “ai hdv nevd 
heard how it is played, but from what you say, I under- 
hd:d hau it iz pleid, b.\t frdm hwot ju: sei, ai Andd- 
stand that the rules of the game must be very different 
'stand ddt dd ru:lz dv dd geim mdst bi: veri difrdnt 
from the rules of the kind of football that is played in 
frdm dd ru:lz ov dd kaind dv futbod ddt iz pleid in 
my country. I don’t see how it is possible to kick a ball 
mai kAntri. ai daunt si: hau it iz posdbl to kik d bod 
straight if it’s not round. I’m sure it must be much 
st) eit if its not raund. aim fuor it most bi: mAtf 
434 
The Forty-Fifth (45th) Chapter. 
more difficult to kick the ball to the right man.” “Well! 
mo: difikdlt td kik da bo:l ta da rait mcen” “wel! 
wait till some other time, and you’ll see for yourself 
weit til s\m Ada taint , and ju:l si: fa jo:'self 
how it is done.” 
hau it iz d-Ati” 
Saturday had come, and Marshall and Storm were on 
scctadi had k\m , and ma:fal and sto:m zva:r on 
their way to the match. They went by bus to the 
dea wei ta da mcetf. dei went bcii b\s ta da 
nearest Underground station. As it was rather late, 
niarist Andagraund stcifan. az it waz ra:da leit, 
they jumped on a bus after it had started moving. 
dei d^Ainpt on a Ijas a:ftar it had sta:tid mu:viy. 
People in London often jump on and off the buses 
pi: pi in l Mid an o:fn d$Ainp on and o:f da bAsiz 
while they are moving, in order to save time. Having 
hwail dei a: mu:viy, in o:da ta seiv tairn. hceviy 
arrived at the Underground station, they went down to 
a'raivd at di Andagraund steijan, dei went dann ta 
the platform. Storm: “It’s quite a long way down to 
da plcetfo.m. sto:m: C( its kwait a log wei dann ta 
the platform; it must be very deep under the ground.” 
da plcetfo:m: it niAst hi: veri di:p Anda da ground” 
Marshall told him that some lines of the Underground 
ma.fal tould him dat saui lainz av di Andagraund 
railways are only just under the ground, but that he 
reilweiz a:r ounli d^ASt Anda da ground , bAt dat hi: 
12/2 
435 
Chapter Forty-Five (45). 
was right in saying that this line was very far down, 
wdz rail in seiiy ddt dis lain wdz veri fa: daun, 
and he added that it was the deepest in London. The 
and hi: eedid ddt it wdz dd di:pist in lAnddn. dd 
train came into the station, and the doors opened. There 
trein keim intd dd steijdn, dtid dd do:z oupdnd. dfd 
behind = at the 
back of 
were so many people just behind the two friends that 
wd: sou meni pi:pi d^ASt bi'haind dd tu: fretidz ddt 
it was hardly necessary for them to do anything to 
it zvdz ha:dli nesisdri fa: ddm td du: enipiy td 
get into the carriage; they were pushed into it by the 
get intd dd k err id 3; dei z vd: puft intu it hai dd 
people behind them; but many of those who were 
pi:pi bi'haind ddm; bdt meni dv douz hu: zvd: 
standing behind them did not get into the carriage, 
steendiy bi'haind ddm did tut get intd dd kerrid 3, 
because there was no more room, and then the doors 
bi'kjz dfd zodz non nu: nan, dtid den dd do:z 
closed. 
klouzd. 
“People don’t usually push so much as they did on 
(t pi:pl dount jicyidli puj sou niAtf dz dei did on 
this platform,” said Storm; but Marshall only laughed, 
dis plertfj’.m” sed stj:m; bdt ma:fdl ounli la:ft, 
saying, “Remember that you are going to a football 
seiiy , “ri'mcmbd ddt ju: a: gouiy tu d futbo:l 
match. We are interested in many different games in 
niectf. zvi: a:r intnstid in meni difrdnt geimz in 
436 
The Forty-Fifth (45th) Chapter. 
this country, but in the eyes of most English people 
dis k\ntri, bat in di aiz av moust iyglif pi:pi 
football is the best game.” Storm: “I noticed that the 
futba.7 iz da best geim” sta:m: “ai nontist ddt dd 
doors opened and closed of themselves. How long have 
d):z oupdmi and klonzd av dam'sclvz. hau hj hav 
you had doors which open and close automatically?” 
ju: herd da:z JmdtJ onpan and klouz o:ta'mertikali?” 
“I can’t tell you how long we have had them, but you 
iC ui ha:nt tel ju: hau lay wi: hav herd dam, bat ju: 
know that during the last fifty years so many inventions 
non eht djuariy dala:st fifti jiaz sou meni in'venjanz 
have been made which save us much time and money, 
hav bi:n meid hivitj seiv as in\tj toim and m\ni, 
as for instance doors which work automatically. To the 
az far instans da:z hwitj wa:h a:ta'mertikali. ta di 
Underground this invention is very useful. It is no 
Midagraund dis iit'venjan iz veri ju:sful. it iz nou 
longer necessary to have two or three men to shut 
layga nesisari ta lieev tu: a pri: men ta f.\t 
the doors of the trains, for now they are all shut by 
da da:z av da treinz, fa non dei a:r j:l j\t bai 
one man.” 
w\n merit” 
Marshall told Storm that they were going to see the 
ma:fal tould sta:m dat dei wa: gouiy ta si: da 
famous Arsenal football club, which is one of the most 
feimas a:sinl futba:l kl\b, hwitj iz wan av da moust 
shut the door = 
close the door 
He shuts, he shut, 
he has shut |7 a/.?. 
/At, /At]. 
437 
Chapter Forty-Five (45). 
by reason of its 
many good players 
= because it has 
so many good 
players 
Arsenal = the 
Arsenal players 
He beats, he beat, 
he has beaten 
[bi:ts, bi:t, bi:tn]. 
He wins, he won, 
he has won [wine, 
wA.n, IV Ail ]. 
seldom = very 
few times 
rush = run with 
great speed 
famous clubs in the world by reason of its many good 
feimds klAbz in da wa:ld bai ri:zn dv its meni gud 
players. Storm had once seen Arsenal at home, where 
pleiaz. sto:m had wavs si:n a:sinl at houm , hzvra 
they had beaten his own country by 4—1. 
dei had bi:tn hiz oun kAntri bai fa: ta u’ail 
Marshall: “That is not strange, because they have 
ma:fal: “dcct iz not streind 3, bi'koz dei hav 
nearly always won when playing on the Continent. 
niali o:lwaz zv\n Invert pleiiy on da kontinant. 
It is very seldom that a foreign club is able to beat 
it iz veri seldom dat a forin klAb iz eibl ta bi:t 
them. I expect that they will win this afternoon, too, 
dant. ai iks'pekt dat dei wil zvin dis a:fta'nu:n, tu:, 
as they are playing so well this year.” 
az dei a: pleiiy sou zvel dis jia ” 
A few minutes later the train stopped, and the people 
a fju: minits leita da trein stopt, and da pi:pi 
rushed out of the train to get up to the street as quickly 
r a jt aut av da trein ta get a p ta da striit az kzvikli 
as possible. Storm had never seen people rush about 
az posabl. storm had neva si:n pi:pi taJ a'baut 
so much as they do in London, especially in the City 
sou 77/a// az dei du: in lAndan, is'pefali in da siti 
and when going to games of some kind. While they 
and liwcn gouiy ta geimz av jaw kaind. hzvail dei 
were waiting for the game to start, Marshall told Storm 
W3: wciti V f d dd 0 ei 'n ta sta:t, ma:fal tould sto:m 
438 
The Forty-Fifth (45th) Chapter. 
something about the English football clubs: “In the 
sAmply a'baut di iyglif futbaA kUbz: “in da 
best known football clubs in England the players are 
best noun futba:l kUbz in iy gland da pleiaz a: 
professionals, which means that football is their work, 
pra'fefanalz, hwitj mi: ns dat futba:l iz dea wa:k, 
not only a game that gives them pleasure. As it is 
nat ounli a geirn dat givz dam ple$a. az it iz 
necessary for a professional football player to be able 
nesisari far a pra'fefanal futbaA pleia ta bi: eibl 
to run very fast, he must not only have good legs, but 
ta r.\n veri fa:st, hi: mast not oiodi hcev gud legz, bat 
also very good lungs. It is also very important to have 
a:lsou veri gud Uyz. it iz a:lsou veri im'pa:tant ta hcev 
a strong heart. Without especially good lungs and a 
a stray ha A. ivid'aut is'pefali gud l\yz and a 
strong heart, a man will not be able to last very long 
stray ha:t , a mcen wil nat bi: eibl ta 7 a:st veri lay 
as a professional. These are two of the most important 
az a pra'fefanal. di:z a: tu: av da moust im'paAant 
things required of a professional, but, besides, he has 
piyz ri'kwaiad av a pra'fefanal, b\t, bi'saidz, hi: hcez 
to be in very good health, for if he has not got that, 
ta bi: in veri gud help, far if hi: haz nat gat dcet , 
he cannot play football. A professional must, therefore, 
hi: kcenat plei futbaA. a pra'fefanal niASt, deaf a:, 
give much attention to his health. These players are 
giv m Atf a'ten fan ta his help. di:z pleiaz a: 
lungs 
heart 
to last = to 
continue 
to be in good 
health = not to 
be ill 
give attention to 
— attend to 
12/3 
439 
Chapter Forty-Five (45). 
nearly always thinking of their health, giving it even 
nidli a:lwaz piykiy av dea help . yiviy it i:van 
more attention than they give to their practice in playing 
ma:r a'tenfan dan dci yiv ta dra prcektis in pleihj 
football or their exercise in running, jumping, kicking, 
futba.l a: dear cksasaiz in rAiiiy, d^Ainpiy, kikiy, 
etc. Many of them smoke and drink very little. Just 
it'setra . mcni av dam sniouk and driyk veri litl. d^Ast 
as the ladies at Hollywood are proud of their legs, so, 
az da leidiz at luliwud a: praud av dea legz, sou, 
too, are professionals. The muscles of their legs are 
tu:, a: pra'fcfanalz. da inxslz av dea legz a: 
quite hard. They take exercise in running, kicking, 
kwait ha:d. dei teik eksasciiz in rAniij, kikiy, 
and jumping every day, and this makes the muscles 
and d^Ainpiy evri dei, and dis nieiks da iiiasIz 
of their legs hard.” 
av dea legz Jia:d” 
whistle 
Storm and Marshall had been waiting for the game to 
sto:m and ma:jal had bi:n iveitiy fa da geim ta 
start, and now the whistle was blown. Storm noticed 
sta:t, and nan da Jnvisl zvaz bloun. sta:m noutist 
that the grass was not particularly good, and in some 
dat da gra:s zcaz nat pa'tikjulali gud, and in SAm 
places he was even able to see the earth itself under 
plcisiz hi: zvaz i:van cibl ta si: di a:p if self a nda 
the grass. “Where I play football at home, you can 
da gra:s. “hzvear ai plci futba:l at honm, jti: kan 
440 
The Forty-Fifth (45th) Chapter. 
see nothing but grass,” he told Marshall. “You would 
si: n.Apifj bat gra:s*' hi: tould ma:fdl. “ju: wad 
not find any places where the earth might be seen.” 
rut faind eni pleisiz Invra di a:p nicvit hi: si:n.” 
Storm and Marshall soon saw that the Arsenal players 
sta:m and mu:jal su:n sa: dat di a.sinl pleiaz 
were much stronger than the players of the other club, 
wa: m.\If straijga dan da pleiaz av di \da kl.\b. 
Every time the ball was kicked over the white line at 
evri taiwi da ba:l waz kikt ouva da hzvait lain at 
the side by one club, the whistle was blown, and the 
da said bai zv.\n kUb, da hud si waz bloun , and da 
play stopped, until the other club had taken the ball 
plei stapt, \n til di \da kl.\b had teikn da ba:l 
and thrown it in again. Storm had very seldom seen 
and proun it in a'grin. sta:m had veri sold am si:n 
the players in a match throw the ball in so many times. 
da pleiaz in a mcetj prou da ba:l in sou meni taimz. 
The Arsenal players were playing against the wind, 
di a.sinl pleiaz wa: pleiiy a'yeinst da wind, 
but yet the first half of the match finished 2—1 in 
bat jet da fa:st ha:f av da mcetf f ini ft tu: wah in 
favour of Arsenal. In the second half of the game they 
feivar av a.sinl. in da sekand ha:f av da geim dei 
had the advantage of the wind, and with the wind behind 
herd di ad'va.ntid 3 av da wind, and wid da wind bthaind 
them they finished the match 5—1 in their favour. 
dam dei fin iff da mcetf faiv w,\n in dta feiva. 
He throws, he 
threw, he has 
thrown [pronz, 
pru:, proun]. 
favour (here) ~ 
advantage 
441 
Chapter Forty-Five (45). 
sport = swimming, 
riding, hunting, 
fishing, etc. 
step 
they’ve = they 
have 
to their credit = 
in their favour 
A large number of men were present either to take 
d laid 3 nxmbdr dv men wd: preznt aids td teik 
photographs or to write reports of the match for the 
foutdgraifs j • td rait ri'pjits dv dd liuctf fd dd 
newspapers, which always bring long reports of all that 
njuispeipdz, hwitf jilwdz brig hg ri'pjits dv Jil ddt 
has taken place in the world of sport. 
hdz teikn plcis in dd wild dv spjit. 
There had been about 50,000 people at the match, 
dfd hdd him o'bant fifti pauzdnd pi: pi dt dd inert f, 
and when the two friends left the place, it was almost 
dnd lnven dd tit: frendz left dd plcis, it wdz jihnoust 
impossible to take more than one short step at a time. 
im'pjsdbl td teik nu: ddn w\n fjit step dt d taiin. 
“It is rather tiring to have to take such small ladies' 
“it iz raidd taidrig td Jiecv td teik s\tf smjil leidiz 
steps,” said Marshall, laughing. Storm: “How many 
steps,” sed maifdl, la i fig. stdimi “ban meni 
matches have Arsenal played this season?” Marshall: 
mcctfiz hdv aisinl pleid dis siizn?” maifdl: 
“Counting the one to-day, they’ve played six times, but 
“kauntig dd w\n td'dei, deiv pleid siks taimz, bdt 
once they didn’t win, so that there are five matches 
WAns dci didnt win, sou ddt dfd faiv mertfiz 
to their credit. I remember that some years ago they 
td dfd kredit. ai ri'membd ddt s\m jidz d'gou dei 
played eighteen matches on the Continent and came 
pleid ei tun mertfiz jn dd kjntindnt dnd keim 
442 
The Forty-Fifth (45th) Chapter. 
back with all eighteen to their credit.” 
berk wid a :l 1 ei'ti:n ta dea kredit” 
They continued to discuss football, and during the 
dei kan l tinju:d td dis'k.\s futbaA, and djuariy da 
discussion Storm asked how long football had been 
dis'k\jan sta:m a:skt hau hy futbaA had bi:n 
played in England. “It has been played in some form 
pleid in iygland. “it haz bi:n pleid in saw fj:m 
or other for hundreds of years, but it has only been 
a:r Ada fa hxndradz av jiaz, bat it haz ounli bi:n 
played in its present form for about a hundred years.” 
pleid in its preznt fj:m far a'bant a hAndrad jiaz” 
When they reached the Underground station, they had 
hzven dei riAft di And aground steifan, dei had 
not yet finished their discussion of football. Marshall 
not jet f ini ft dea dis x k\fan av futbaA. ma:fal 
was telling Storm about the most important match of 
zvaz teliy sfj:m a'baut da nioust im'pjAant mcetf av 
the year, the one between England and Scotland. “The 
da jia, da wah bi'twi:n iy gland and skatland. “da 
number of people who go to a match like that is very 
nAmbar av- pi:pi hu: you tu a inertf laik dert iz veri 
great. One year there were 150,000 
greit. wah jia dea iva: wah hAndrad and fifti pauzand 
present in Glasgow. It’s not always the country that 
preznt in gla:sgou. its >ut aAvuaz da kAntri dat 
plays best that wins. The players know that the eyes 
pleiz best dat zvinz. da pleiaz non dat di aiz 
443 
Chapter Forty-Five (45). 
of 150,000 people are upon them, 
av WAn hAndrdd and fifti pcinzdnd pi:pi a:r a'pan ddin, 
and very often it gets on their nerves; it makes them 
and veri a:fn it gets on dr a na.vz; it meiks dam 
nervous. This means that it’s often the players who 
na:vas. dis mi.nz dat its a:fn da pleiaz hu: 
have the best nerves that win. Besides the match with 
hcev da best na:vz dat win. hi'saidz da nuetj wid 
Scotland, we play many international matches every 
skatland, wi: plei meni inta'mejanal imeifiz evri 
year, for example against France and Holland. Such 
jia, far ig'zarmpl a'geinst fra:ns and haland. s.\tf 
matches are called international matches, because 
mcetfiz a: ka:ld inta'nccfanal mcetfiz, bi'kaz 
players of different nations take part in them. I think 
pleiaz av difrant neifanz teik pa:t in daw. ai piyk 
that these international matches in the world of sport 
dat di:z inta'mefanal mcetfiz in da wa.ld av spa:t 
are of great importance in helping the different nations 
a:r av greit im'pa:tans in helpirj da difrant neifanz 
of the world to get a better understanding of each 
av da wa.ld ta get a bctar \nda'stcendit/ av i:tf 
other.” 
Ada.” 
444 
The Forty-Fifth (45th) Chapter. 
EXERCISE A. 
Marshall asked if it would be — to Storm to go to a 
football — on the following Saturday. In England they 
have a — of football called —, which has other — than 
the usual kind of football. The players — a ball which 
is not —. Marshall and Storm were rather late and 
— on a bus to be in time for their train. The platform 
was — under the ground. The two friends were — into 
the train by the people — them. One of the — which 
have been made during the last fifty years, is doors 
that open and-. One of the most famous football 
— is Arsenal. It has — many matches, and it is very 
— that it is — by other clubs on the Continent. When 
the train stopped, the people — up to the street. Two 
of the most important things required of a — football 
player are to have good — and a strong —. He must 
also give very much — to his —. The — of his legs 
are very hard. When the — was blown, the play 
started. In some places Storm could sec the — under 
the grass. When the ball was kicked out by one club, 
it was — in again by the other. The — finished in 
— of Arsenal, and now the club had five matches to 
its —. Many men had been present to write — for the 
newspapers, which write about all that takes place in 
the world of —. When the two friends left the place, 
they could only take one — at a time. They continued 
their — of football, which game has been played in 
England in some — or other for hundreds of years. In 
the — matches it is often the players with the best — 
that win. 
WORDS: 
kick 
round 
jump 
deep 
push 
convenient 
match 
kind 
rule 
behind 
invention 
shut 
automatically 
club 
win 
won 
seldom 
beat 
beaten 
rush 
professional 
lung 
heart 
attention 
health 
muscle 
whistle 
earth 
throw 
threw 
thrown 
game 
445 
Chapter Forty-Five (45). 
favour 
credit 
report 
sport 
step 
discussion 
form 
international 
nerve 
understanding 
count 
last 
EXERCISE B. 
Write about a game you are interested in. Do you 
take part in any sort of game yourself, or do you go 
to see matches between famous clubs? Tell us about 
some interesting facts connected with that game, in 
about 200—300 words. If you do not know all the right 
words, express what you mean in some other words. 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
In the sentences: This is a tree; I saw a man; he gave 
me a big apple, the word “a” is called the indefinite 
article \in'dcfinit a:tiki]. 
The indefinite article, however, is not always “a”. 
Sometimes it is “an”. If the word which follows the 
indefinite article begins with a consonant \kansanant\. 
that is, b, d, d, p , f, y, h, j , k . /. m, h, p. r, s, /. s, /. 
v, w, the indefinite article is “a”. Examples: John is a 
boy. We have a tall tree in the garden. 
If the word which follows the indefinite article, be¬ 
gins, not with a consonant, but with a vowel | \vanal\, 
that is, a:, cc, ai, an, c, ci, a, a:, i, i:, ou, ai, u, u:, t:a, 
j, a:, it is “an”. Examples: I found an apple. My father 
is an old man. I have got an idea, but: I have got a 
good idea. 
Notice that it is the way in which the word is pro¬ 
nounced that matters. Sometimes the letter “u” is pro¬ 
nounced as \ju\ or | ju: |; then the indefinite article “a” 
is used in front of it: A usual thing; Oxford has a uni- 
446 
The Forty-Fifth (45th) Chapter. 
versity. Sometimes the letter “u” is pronounced [ \J, 
then the indefinite article is “an”: An uncle; an unusual 
thing. 
If the indefinite article is used before a word which 
begins with an “h” which is not pronounced, as for 
example “hour”, it takes the form “an”, not “a”. Ex¬ 
ample: An hour has sixty minutes; but: A hospital needs 
money. 
The word “the” we call the definite article [dcf'mit 
a:tikl\. In the sentences, “He took the book from the 
book-shelf in the sitting-room”, “the flowers in his 
garden are beautiful”, the word “the” is the definite 
article. The definite article is pronounced in two ways: 
| da | and | di \. It is pronounced \da\ in front of con¬ 
sonants, \di\ in front of vowels: The man [da mccn\; 
the old man \di ould linen |. Again it is the way the 
word is pronounced that matters: The uncle | di \ijkl\; 
the United States [da ju.'naitid steits j ; the hour [di aua \; 
the hospital [da Juspitl\. 
Questions: 
What are the two forms of the indefinite article in 
English? ... When do we use one, ^nd when the 
other? ... What is the definite article? ... What are 
the two pronunciations of the definite article, and when 
are they used? ... Which sounds are called vowels, 
and which consonants? ... 
12/4 
447 
Chapter Forty-Six (46). 
The Forty-Sixth (46th) Chapter. 
on a Sunday = 
on Sundays 
as well = besides 
A SUNDAY MORNING 
IN THE EAST END 
Most people do not work on Sundays; they rest from 
moust pi:pi du: nat wa:k an s.\ndiz; del rest fram 
their usual work. In England, Sunday is therefore also 
dea ju:^ual wa:k. in iygland, s\ndi iz deafa.r a:Ison 
called the day of rest. But Marshall — like many other 
ka:ld da dei av rest. bat mcr.jal — talk mcni .\dar 
Englishmen — was not the kind of man to rest very 
fojglifman — waz not da kaind av linen ta rest veri 
much on a Sunday. He often went into the country 
niAtf on a s\ndi. hi: o:fn went inta da kAntri 
or spent the day on the river; that was his kind of rest. 
o: spent da dei an da riva; dcet waz his kaind av rest. 
People in foreign countries think that Englishmen go 
pi:pl in farm kAntriz piyk dat iyglifman gou 
to church two or three times every Sunday, but as soon 
ta tja:tf tu: a pri: taints evri SAiidi, bat as su:n 
as they come to England, they make the discovery that, 
as dei k\m tu iygland, dei meik da dis'kAvari dat, 
although many Englishmen go to church, the English 
a.tdou meni iyglifman gou ta tfa:tf , di iyglif 
as a nation spend their Sundays doing many other things 
az a neifan spend dea SAndiz du.iy meni Ada piyz 
as well. Storm had been like other foreigners in this 
az wel. sta:m had bi:n laik Ada farinaz in dis 
448 
The Forty-Sixth (46th) Chapter. 
matter and had made the same discovery: that Sunday 
mceta dnd had meid da seim dis'kAvari: dat SAndi 
in England is not what it is said to be. 
in iy gland iz nat hwat it iz sed ta bi:. 
One Sunday Marshall said to him, “I am sure that you 
w\n sAndi mu:jal sed ta him, “ai am fua dat ju: 
have wondered what people do in London on Sundays. 
hav w Alidad hwat pi: pi du: in l And an an SAndiz. 
If you have time, we could spend the whole day visiting 
if ju: lucv tairn , ivi: kad spend da houl dei vizitif) 
different interesting places. I will not tell you in 
difrant intristiy pleisiz. ai wil not tel ju: in 
advance what we’re going to see, but you may be sure 
ad'va:ns hwat wia gouiy ta si:, bat ju: mei bi: Jua 
that there will be many surprises.” “I should like 
dat dea wil bi: meni sa'praiziz.” <( ai fad laik 
nothing better,” Storm told Marshall. 
UApiy beta, ” sta:m tould ma:fal. 
To begin with, they went right through the City by 
ta bi'gin wid, dei went rait pru: da siti bai 
bus until they reached the East End. Here they 
bAs ah 1 til dei ri:tjt di i:st end. hia dei 
got off the bus. Storm had been to that part of London 
gat a:f da 1)as. sta:m had bi:n ta dcct pa:t av l And an 
before and was very pleased to be able to recognize it. 
In'fa: and waz veri pli:zd ta bi: eibl ta rekagnaiz it. 
Marshall: “London is so big, not only to a foreigner, 
ma:jal: u L\ndan iz sou big, nat oititli tu a farina, 
449 
Chapter Forty-Six (46). 
quite (here) = 
well 
seller = a man 
who sells goods 
but even to many Englishmen, so I can quite under- 
bdt i:vdn td meni iyglifman, sou ai kdn kwait Andd- 
stand that it must be very pleasant to recognize a place 
'stand ddt it m\st bi: veri pleznt td rckdgnaiz d plots 
where you have been before.” Storm and Marshall 
hwf.d ju: lidv bi:n bi'fo:” stj:m dnd ma:jdl 
now left the main street and entered a side street which 
nau left dd mein stri:t dnd cntdd d said stri:t hwitj 
was filled with thousands of people. Storm had seen 
wdz fild wid pauzdndz dv pi:pi. storm hdd si:n 
a crowd of 50,000 at the football match, and the 
d kraud dv fifti pauzond dt dd futbo:l rncetf, dnd dd 
crowd of people in this street seemed to be nearly as 
kraud dv pi:pi in dis stri:t si:md td bi: nidli dz 
big. Along both sides of the street there were sellers, 
big. d'hy boup saidz dv dd stri:t ded wd: seldz, 
who were crying at the top of their voices to make 
hu: wd: kraiirj dt dd top ov ded voisiz td meik 
people buy their goods. Each seller seemed to be 
pi:pi bai ded gudz. i:tf seld si:md td bi: 
trying to cry louder than his fellow-seller. The street 
traiirj td krai laudd ddn hiz felouseld. dd stri:t 
itself was rather narrow, and being so filled with 
it'self wdz ra:dd ncerou, dnd bi:irj sou fild wid 
people, it didn’t leave room for traffic of any kind. 
pi:pl y it didnt li:v rurm fd trcefik dv eni kaind. 
It was very different from the main street which was 
it wdz vcri difrdnt frdm dd mein stri:t hzvitf zvdz 
450 
The Forty-Sixth (46th) Chapter. 
very wide, with room enough for the great bus traffic 
vcri waid , wid ru:m /'ha/ fa dd greit bxs trcefik 
to East London. Most of the side streets in this part 
tu i:st I And an. inoust av da said stri:ts in dis pa:t 
of the town, however, were not very wide. 
av da taun, hau'eva, n'a: nat vcri waid. 
Marshall: “A place of this kind, where people do their 
ma:fal: “a pleis av dis kaind , hwea pi:pl du: de.a 
buying not only in the shops, but in the street itself, 
baiiy nat ounli hi da Japs, bat in da stri.t it'self, 
we call a street market. All over the country we have 
wi: ka:l a stri.t nui:kit. a:l ouva da k.\ntri wi: hccv 
street markets like this.” 
stri:t n\a:kits laik dis.” 
Many of the sellers had baskets on their arms, others 
meni av da selaz herd ha:skits an dear a:wz, xdaz 
were holding up their goods in both hands, so that 
wa: houldiy a p dea gudz in boup hcendz, sou dat 
everybody might see what they had. If the goods were 
evribadi inait si: hwat dei head, if da gudz wa: 
not held up in this way, the sellers would not do so 
nat held \p in dis wei, da selaz wud nat du: sou 
much business. Storm and Marshall looked into many 
niAtf biznis. sta:m and ma:fal lukt inta meni 
of the baskets, sometimes asking the prices of the goods. 
av da ba:skits, sxmtaimz a:skiy da proisiz av da gudz. 
Storm heard that the prices were very low, but Mar- 
sta:m ha:d dat da praisiz wa: veri lou, bat nw:- 
wide = broad 
market 
to hold up = to 
lift 
He holds, he held, 
he has held [houldz, 
held . held]. 
451 
Chapter Forty-Six (46). 
quality = value shall, on seeing his surprise, told him that the quality 
fol, on si:iy hiz so'praiz, toidd him , dot do kzvoliti 
of the goods was just as low. “You can’t expect to get 
dv do (judz zvoz d^Ast ds lou. “ju: ka:nt iks'pekt td get 
goods of a high quality at such low prices,” he added. 
cjudz dv d hai kwjliti dt SAtj lou praisiz/' hi: cedid. 
When passing a woman with a basket of apples, they 
hzven pa:siy 3 wunion zvid d ba:skit dv ceplz , dei 
noticed that she was rubbing the apples hard to make 
noutist ddt fi: zvoz r.xbitj di ceplz ha:d td meik 
them shine. They would have quite liked some apples, 
ddi // Jain. dei umd hdv kwait laikt sdin ceplz , 
but after seeing the apples rubbed on her dirty dress, 
bdt a:ftd si:iy di ceplz twbd jn hd: (h:ti dres, 
they passed on without buying any. All the articles 
dei pa: st jn wid'aut baiiy eni. j: 1 di a.tiklz 
poor = bad they saw were cheap, but their quality was so poor 
dei sj: wd: tfi:p , bdt ded kwoliti wdz sou pud 
that they were not worth the money. Marshall said 
ddt dei Wd: not Wd:p dd m\ni m ma:fdl sed 
that although the prices were low, he had seldom 
ddt j:Vdou dd praisiz wa: lou, hi: hod seldom 
found anything worth buying, when he went to street 
found enipiij Wd:p baiiy hwen hi: went to stri:t 
markets. 
ma: kits. 
increase — get As they walked along, Storm’s surprise increased with 
jr ( ) c { 7\ f o:kt o'Ijij, stj:mz so'praiz in'kri:st zuid 
452 
The Forty-Sixth (46th) Chapter. 
each step they took. At last he turned to Marshall, 
i:tf step dei tak. dt la:st hi: ta:nd td ma:fal, 
and said, “Now I am beginning to discover that there 
and sed, “nau ai am bi'giniy ta dis'kwa dat dea 
are more sides to the English nation than I had thought; 
ma: saidz ta di iyglif neifan dan ai had pa:t; 
but I have also discovered that it is necessary to come discover = find 
bat ai hav a:lsou disk wad dat it iz nesisari ta kAin out 
to England in order to find out about them. I am sure 
tu iy gland in a:da ta faind ant a'baut dam. ai am Jua 
that when I return to my own country and tell people 
dat hwen ai ri'ta.n ta mai oun kAntri and tel pi:pl 
the facts about the English, most of them will not 
da fcekts a'baut di iyglif, moust av darn wil not 
believe me. If anybody had told me in advance that anybody = any 
bi'li:v mi:. if enibadi had tould mi: in ad'va:ns dat one 
it was possible to buy goods in the streets of London 
it waz pasabl ta bai gudz in da stri:ts az i l And an 
on a Sunday morning, I should not have believed it 
an a sAndi ma:niy, ai fad not hav bi'li:vd it 
myself.” Marshall: “Well, I told you before we started 
mai'self ” ma.fal: “wel, ai tould ju: bi'fa: wi: sta.’tid 
that you must prepare yourself for many surprises.” 
dat ju: mast pri'pea ja:' self fa meni sa'praiziz” 
Storm: “And I thought I had prepared myself for 
sta:m: u and ai pa:t ai had pri'pead mat'self far 
everything. But now I see that there is a surprise 
evripiy. bat nau ai si: dat daz a sa'praiz 
453 
Chapter Forty-Six (46). 
every minute or two for which I have not been pre- 
cvri mi nit a tu: fa hwitf ai hav rut bi:n pri- 
of course = it is 
understood 
pared.” Marshall: “Of course I might have told you 
'pead” ina:fal: “ av ka:s ai mait hai> tonld ju: 
all about our trip before we went out, but I thought 
a:l a'baut ana trip bi'fa: wi: went cnit, bat ai pe:t 
it would be still better to show you things without 
it wad bi: stil beta ta fou ju: piyz wid'aut 
beforehand = in 
advance 
telling you about them beforehand.” Storm: “You 
telifj ju: a'baut dam bi'fa:hccnd” sta:m: “ju: 
are quite right! Of course it has been much more fun 
a: kwait rait! av ka:s it haz bi:n m\tf nu: fxn 
for me in this way.” 
fa mi: in dis wei” 
Now and then they saw men standing on boxes, 
nan and den dei so: men stcendirj on baksiz. 
surround = be on 
all sides of 
speaking, surrounded by people who were listening to 
spi:kifj, sa'raundid bai pi: pi hu: we: lisniy ta 
them. Some of these men said such funny things that 
dam. SAin av di:z men sed SAtj fAni pirjz dat 
everybody laughed. Many people seemed to have come 
evribadi la:ft. meni pi:pi sirmd ta hav kxm 
to the street market, not in order to buy anything, but 
ta da stri:t ma:kit, rut in a:da ta bai enipirj, bat 
only in order to enjoy themselves. When the sellers 
ounli in a:da tu in'd^ai dam'selvs. hwen da selaz 
saw a possible customer, four or five of them would at 
sa: a pasabl kwstama , fa:r a faiv av dam wad at 
454 
The Forty-Sixth (46th) Chapter. 
once surround him so that it was difficult for him to 
wans saraund him sou dat it ivaz difikalt fa him to 
get away. 
get d'wei. 
Storm suddenly saw a strange sight, one of the strangest 
stj:m SAcfnli sj : a streind 3 suit, wah dv do streind ^ist 
sights he had ever seen, a monkey sitting on a man’s 
suits hi: hdd eva si:n, a niAyki sitiy on 3 manz 
shoulder with the man’s hat in its hand. The man was 
foulda zoid da manz hat in its hand. da man waz 
not able to see, for he was blind. On his coat was a 
not cihl td si:, fa hi: waz hlaind. an hiz kout waz a 
piece of paper with the w^ord ‘blind’, so that people 
pi:s av pci pa wid da wa:d c blciind\ sou dat pi: pi 
might know that he could not see. The monkey was 
wait non dat hi: kud not si:. da m.vjki waz 
holding out the blind man’s hat, and many people put 
houldiy out da blciind mans hat , and merii >pi:pl put.. 
money into it. It seemed to like its work, and some- 
niAni intu it. it si:md ta laik its wa:k, and sahi- 
times it jumped from one shoulder of the man to the 
taimz it d^Ampt fram wau fouldar av da man ta di 
slwulder 
other. 
Ada. 
A little later, they discovered a man selling knives 
a litl leita, dei dis'kAvad a man seliy naivz 
which were so cheap that Storm wanted to buy one; 
hwitf wa: sou tfi:p dat sta:m ivantid ta luii zo\n: 
455 
Chapter Forty-Six (46). 
but Marshall told him that if he wanted a sharp knife, 
bat ina:fdl tould him ddt if hi: wontid a fa:p naif. 
that is, a knife that is really able to cut, he would 
dcet iz, a naif ddt iz riali ei-bl ta ) kAt, hi: wad 
have to go somewhere else for it, as it was impossible 
hav td gou SAmhwrar els far it, az it waz im'pasabl 
to get a sharp knife very cheap. 
ta get a fa:p naif veri tfi:p. 
Marshall suddenly noticed that Storm was not there, 
ma:fal SAdnli noutist dat sta:m waz not dr a, 
and he could not see him anywhere. Five minutes 
and hi: kud nat si: him enihwra. fair minits 
hard = difficult 
map 
passed, and then Storm appeared again, returning round 
pa:st, and den sta:m a'pi ad a'gein , nta.nij round 
the corner of a side street with a small parcel in his 
da kj.nar av a said stri:t wid a situ:l pa:si in hiz 
hand. “It is always hard for me to find my way about 
hand, “it iz o:lwaz ha:d fa mi: ta faind mai wei a'baut 
the streets of London, so when I saw a man selling maps 
da stri.ts av l And an, sou hwen ai so: a man seliy maps 
of London which were both large and cheap, I bought 
av l And an Jnvitf wa: boup la:d$ and tfi:p, ai ba:t 
one,” Storm explained. “I was really very glad,” said 
wah” stj:m iks'pleind. “ai waz riali veri glad/ 3 sed 
Marshall, “to see you appear once more. Although the 
ma:fal, “ta si: ju: a'pia zvahs mo:. a:l'dou da 
parcel you have in your hand is very small, there seems 
pa: si ju: hccv in jj: hand iz veri snn:l, dr a si:mz 
456 
The Forty-Sixth (46th) Chapter. 
to be more in it than a map of London.” “Perhaps,” 
ts hi: ms:r in it dsn s mcep sv L\ndsn” “ps'hceps” 
said Storm, “I bought one or two other things at the 
sed stj.m, “ai bs:t waii s tu: Ads piijz st ds 
same time; who knows?” “I won’t ask you to tell me 
seim taiw: hu: nouz?” “ai wount a:sk jn: ts tel mi: 
what you have bought, of course. I only hope that you’ll 
Iiii'jt jit: hsv ho:t . sv ko:s. ai ounli houp dst ju:l 
not be sorry later on and regret that you bought it.” 
not bi: ssri leitsr jn snd ri'gret dst jn: bs:t it” 
“What I have bought,” Storm replied, “is both of good 
“hwst ai hsv bs:t” stj:m ri'plaid, “iz boup sv gud 
quality and cheap, so that I’m quite sure that I shan’t 
kiv.diti snd tfi:p, son dst aim kzvait fns dst ai fa:nt 
regret it. Remember, Marshall,” he said, laughing, 
ri'gret it. ri'membs , ma:jsl” hi: sed, la:fiy , 
“that the money came out of my pocket and not yours.” 
“dst ds iiiAni keim ant sv trial pskit snd not jo:z” 
“It is almost too hot to-day,” said Marshall, “to enter 
“it iz s:lmoust tu: hst ts'dei ” sed ma:jsl, “tu entsr 
into a discussion. I think it must be 90° (degrees) 
intu s dis'kAfsn. ai piyk it mASt bi: nainti di'gri:z 
in the shade, so it is no wonder if we feel a little hot 
in ds jeid, sou it iz non WAndsr if wi: fi:l s litl list 
here in the sun. I propose that we cross the street to 
hisr in ds sau. ai prs'pouz dst ivi: krss ds stri:t ts 
get into the shade on the other side of the street.” 
get ints ds Jeid .in di Ads said sv ds str'r.t” 
shan’t = shall 
not 
ninety degrees 
Fahrenheit 
[feermhait] — 
32.2° (thirty-two 
point two degrees) 
Celsius [sclsijs] 
s/uidr 
457 
Chapter Forty-Six (46). 
WORDS: 
market 
wide 
crowd 
rest (verb) 
rest 
recognize 
seller 
fellow-seller 
cry 
basket 
hold 
held 
worth 
quality 
rub 
increase 
discovery 
discover 
prepare 
anybody 
beforehand 
believe 
surround 
sight 
shoulder 
blind 
sharp 
appear 
parcel 
map 
458 
EXERCISE A. 
Storm made the — that the English do not — very much 
on Sundays, even if Sunday is called the day of —. 
When Marshall and Storm came to the East End, Storm 
was able to — the place. The street — are situated in 
streets that are not so — as the main streets. There 
were — of people listening to the — who were — at 
the top of their voices. Some of the sellers had — on 
their arms, while others were — up the goods in their 
hands. The goods are not always — the money, because 
the — is poor. 
Marshall and Storm saw a woman — apples on her dirty 
dress. Storm’s surprise — while they were walking 
along, because he — so many new things which he had 
not been — for. He said that if — had told him — that 
it was possible to buy goods in the streets of London 
on a Sunday morning, he would not have — it. Later 
they saw a man speaking from a box, — by people. 
Another — they saw was a monkey sitting on the — 
of a — man. Marshall was telling Storm that he could 
not buy — knives for next to nothing, but Storm was 
not there. He — five minutes later with a — in his 
hand. In the parcel was a — and other things, and Mar¬ 
shall said, “I hope you will.not — that you bought 
them.” The weather was very hot, 90 — in the —. Mar¬ 
shall said that of — he might have told Storm all about 
their trip beforehand. 
The Forty-Sixth (46th) Chapter. 
EXERCISE B. 
Answer these questions with full sentences: 
What do you do before you go to your work? .. . What 
do you have for breakfast? ... Where do you work, in 
town or in the country? ... What does your manager 
say if you are late in the morning? ... How many hours 
do you work a day? ... For how long have you had 
your present work? .. . Are you interested in it, or 
would you like to try some other work? . .. Are you 
more busy in the morning or in the afternoon? . .. How 
do you like your manager? ... 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
Some words tell us how, when, or where something is 
done. Examples: slowly, easily, automatically, kindly, 
now, then, already, here, there. These words are called 
adverbs \(cdva:bz\. 
The adverbs that tell us how something is done are 
usually made by adding -ly to an adjective. Examples: 
He walked quickly to the door (quick + ly). They __ plug 
lived happily for many years (happy 4- ly). She was 
sitting comfortably in a big chair (comfortable + ly). 
Notice that ‘y’ at the end of an adjective is changed 
into ‘i’ before -ly is added, and that -le at the end of 
an adjective becomes -ly. — Adverbs that tell how, 
that is, in what way or manner \ni(cnd\ something is 
done, are called adverbs of manner. 
regret 
degree 
shade 
of course 
as well 
hard 
plus 
poor 
The adverbs that tell us when or how often something 
takes place, are called adverbs of time. Now, then, 
459 
Chapter Forty-Six (46). 
already, soon, yesterday, to-day, to-morrow, are adverbs 
that tell us when something is done. Often, never, 
usually, always, sometimes, are some adverbs that say 
how often something takes place. Examples: It often 
rains in England. He is never at home. 
Adverbs that tell us where something takes place are, 
for instance, somewhere, there, here, far, away. They 
are usually called adverbs of place. 
The adverbs we have spoken of, so far, are adverbs 
that are used with verbs. You will also find some that 
are used with adjectives or with other adverbs to tell 
us how much . Here are some examples of adverbs 
used with adjectives: I am not quite ready. You are 
very naughty children. That is good enough for me. 
The coat is too big. This is not so difficult. And here 
are some examples of adverbs used with other adverbs: 
He spoke quite openly of what he had done. They 
walked very slowly. You don’t come here often enough. 
It cannot be done too well (‘well’ is an adverb). We 
are not working so hard now (‘hard’ is an adverb here). 
These adverbs are called adverbs of degree. 
Many adverbs may be used for making comparisons. 
When used in that way, ‘more’ and ‘most’ are put be¬ 
fore the adverbs, for instance: He talked more quietly 
than ever before. Who ran most quickly? 
Questions: 
What different sorts of adverbs have you learned? ... 
Can you find examples of the different sorts of adverbs 
in chapter 46? ... 
460 
Chapter Forty-Seven (47). 
The Forty-Seventh (47th) Chapter. 
A BUSY SUNDAY 
Marshall explained to Storm that the so-called East 
ma:fal iks'pleind ta sto:m dat da souk d: Id i:st 
End, where they were now, is part of East London. 
end, hwed dei wa: nau, iz pa:t av i:st lAnddn. 
“Most of the people in the East End are very poor,” 
“moast av da pi:pl in di i:st end a: veri pua ” 
he said, “and you will often find two families living 
hi: sed, “and ju: mil a:fn faind tu: fcemiliz livitj 
together in the same flat or in a one-family house. 
ta'gedar in da seim fleet o:r in a WAnfeemili haus. 
These people live under very bad conditions, but the 
di:z pi:pl liv Anda veri heed kandifanz, hat da 
poor in the large cities all over the world live under 
pua in da la:d 3 sitiz o:l ouva da zva:ld liv Anda 
conditions just as bad, I think.” 
kan'difanz d$Ast az heed, ai piyk” 
To Storm’s question if there were any stores in this 
ta sto:mz kwestfan if dea wa:r eni sta:z in dis 
part of the town, Marshall answered, “You will not 
pa:t av da taun , ma:f&l a:nsad, “ju: mil nat 
find many stores in the East End; most of the shops 
faind meni sta:z in di i:st end; moust av da fops 
here are rather small. You will notice that fruit is 
hia a: ra:da sma.i. ju: mil noutis dat fru:t iz 
store = a very 
large shop, selling 
all kinds of goods 
461 
Chapter Forty-Seven (47). 
cal 
on a chain = at 
the end of a chain 
c/iai/i 
cheap in the East End. I must remember to buy some 
tfi:p in di i:st end. ai mast ri'incwba ta bai som 
fruit for my mother, because the price here is much 
fru:t fa mat niAdo. bi'baz da prais hio is MAtf 
lower than in our suburb.” 
Iona dan in ana s.\ba:b 
After having bought the fruit, Marshall said that there 
a:fta hcevirj ba:t da frict, mciijal sed dot dfa 
were two or three streets that he wished to show Storm. 
wo: tu: a pri: stri.ts dat hi: wijt ta foil sta:m. 
“They sell nothing but cats, dogs, birds, and other 
“dei scl n.\piy bat beets, dags, ba:dz, and \da 
domestic animals in those streets. We English love 
damestik ecnimalz in doits stri.ts. wi: iyylif Iav 
domestic animals very much, and every Sunday morning 
da'mestik ecnimalz veri in.\tj, and cvri s.xndi ma :ni\) 
large numbers of cats, dogs, and birds are sold in the 
la:d$ n.\mbaz av beets, days, and ba.dz a: sou Id in di 
East End.” 
i:st end 
Before long they reached one of the streets that Mar- 
bi'fa: laij dei ri.tft 20An av da stri.ts dat ma:- 
shall had mentioned, and they saw that every third or 
Jal had men jand, and dei sa: dat cvri pa:d a 
fourth person had bought a dog and had it on a chain. 
• /j; / > pa.sn had bait a dag and heed it an a tfein. 
Storm. k T am always sorry to see a man walking with 
sta.m. ui am a:lwaz sari ta si: a mcen waibiij wid 
462 
The Forty-Seventh (47th) Chapter. 
his dog on a chain, but of course it is necessary for a 
hiz dag an a tfein, bat av ha:. s' if iz nesisari far a 
man who has just bought a dog to have it on a chain 
mcen hu: haz d;j.\st ba:t a dag ta hcev it an a tfein 
at first every time he walks out with it, until he is 
at fa:st evri taun hi: wa:ks out wid it, Afi'til hi: iz 
sure that the dog knows its new home and will not 
fua dat da dag nous its nju: ho inn and wil fiat 
run away. After that he may let it run loose when 
r.\n awei. a:fta dcct hi: tnei let it yah lies hwen 
he takes it out.’' Marshall: “I quite agree with you, 
hi: teihs it out.” nur.fal: “ai hzvait a'gri: wid jit:. 
but it is not always possible. In this busy part of the 
bat it iz nat a:lzvaz pasabl. in dis bizi pcr.t av da 
town, for example, you cannot let the dogs run loose, 
taun, far ig'zu: in pi, ju: keen at let da dagz yah lu:s, 
for they would very quickly run into the middle of 
fa dei lead veri hzvikli yah inta da in id l av 
the street and, perhaps, get under a car or get run over, 
da stri:t and, pa'hceps, get Afidar a ha: a: get yah ouva. 
as we say In several of the suburbs, however, it is 
az zvi: sei. in sevral av da SAba:bz, hau'ez’a, it iz 
possible to let them go loose. Speaking of dogs, I don’t 
pasabl ta let dam gOu lu:s. spi:hiy av dagz. ai daunt 
like the way some kinds of dogs have part of their tails 
laih da wei saih haindz av dagz hcev pa:t av dr a teilz 
cut off just because it is thought beautiful by some of 
kwt a:f d$Ast bi'haz it iz fa:t bju.taful bai saypi av 
463 
Chapter Forty-Seven (47). 
He smells, 
he smelt, 
he has smelt 
[smelz, smelt, 
smelt]. 
the so-called friends of dogs." Storm: “No, I also 
da souka:ld frcndz av dags” sta:m: u non, ai a:lsou 
prefer them with their tails.” 
pri'fa: dam zvib (ha tcilz .” 
The two friends now began walking along the street, 
da tu: frcndz nan bi'gccn zva:kiy a'lay da stri:t. 
and soon their noses told them what was sold there, 
and sum bra nouziz tonld dam Ivwat zvaz sonld bra. 
for they could smell the animals. Storm said that he 
fa dci had smcl di (cnimalz. sta:m scd bat hi: 
had smelt something like it when he went with his 
had smelt sAmpiy laik it hzven hi: zvent zvib hiz 
friends to the Zoo. Seeing some very beautiful birds 
frcndz ta da zu:. siriy sam veri bju:taful ba:dz 
and cats in a shop, they went inside to have a better 
and kects in a jap , dci zvent in 1 said ta Inez' a beta 
look at them. They spent several minutes there playing 
Ink at dam. dci spent scvral minits bra plciiy 
with a small cat, which jumped up on Storm’s shoulder 
zvib a sma:l kcct, hzvitf d^Ampt \p an sta. mz foulda 
as soon as they entered the shop, but at last Marshall 
az sum az dci cut ad da jap, bat at hi:st ma:fal 
said, “We must leave now! There’s still a lot more on 
scd, “zvi: mast li:v nan! daz stil a lat ma:r an 
our programme for to-day, so we had better move on. 
ana prougreem fa ta'dci, sou zvi: had beta mn:v an. 
My real purpose in taking you out to-day was to show 
nwi rial pa:pas in teikiy ju: ant ta'dci zvaz ta fou 
464 
The Forty-Seventh (47th) Chapter. 
you the many different things we do on Sundays, and 
ju: da meni difrant piyz wi: du: an sAndiz, and 
as it's my purpose to get through all of our programme 
az its mai pa:pas ta get pru: a:l av aua prougrcem 
before we return, we’ll now go on to one of the shops 
bi'fa: wi: ri'ta.n, wi:l nau gou an ta WAn av da japs 
that sell beer and other strong drinks. A shop of this 
dat sel biar and Ada stray driyks. a Jap av dis 
kind is called a public house, or a pub for short, and 
kaind iz ka:ld a pAblik haus, a:r a pAb fa ja:t, and 
in England we have so many of them that we say that 
in iygland wi: hcev sou meni av dam dat wi: set dat 
there is a pub on every street corner.” 
daz a pAb an evri sfri:t ka:na” 
In less than a minute they reached a public house. 
in les dan a minit dei ri:tft a pAblik haus. 
Storm was surprised to find that the shop was so full 
sta:m waz sa'praizd ta faind dat da jap waz sou ful 
of people drinking that many had to stand outside with 
av pi:pi driykiy dat meni heed ta stcend aut'said wid 
the glasses in their hands. Storm was all the more 
da gla:siz in dea hcendz. sta:m waz a:l da ma: 
surprised, because he had always thought that public 
sa'praizd, bi'kaz hi: had a:lwaz pa:t dat pAblik 
houses in England were closed on Sundays. 
hauziz in iygland we: klouzd an SAndiz. 
A man that had had a little too much to drink, dropped 
a mcen dat had had a litl tu: mAtj ta driyk, dr apt 
all the more = 
so much more 
465 
Chapter Forty-Seven (47). 
his glass, which was at once smashed to pieces. Another 
hiz gla:s, hwitf zvaz at w.\ns smaft ta pi:siz. a'nxda 
man, who had had far too much to drink, seemed to 
man, hu: had had fa: tu: vnAtj ta drhjk, si:md ta 
like the noise, for he at once picked up his glass and 
laik da noiz, fa hi: at zv.\ns pikt .\p hiz gla:s and 
smashed it, too. “I am afraid that you are getting one 
smaft it, tu:. “ai am a'freid dat ju: a: getiy w\n 
surprise after another,” Marshall said; “but you are 
sa'praiz a.ftar a'tiAda” ma:fal sed; <c bat ju: a: 
really seeing the East End on a Sunday morning.” 
rtali si.iy di i:st. end on a sAtidi mo'.nig” 
He breaks, 
he broke, 
he has broken 
[breiks, brouk, 
broukn]. 
It was very difficult for the man to stand on his feet. 
it zvaz veri difikalt fa da wan ta stand on hiz fi:t. 
Some of his friends tried to support him by holding his 
saw av hiz frendz traid ta sa'po:t hint boi houldiy hiz 
arms, but although they supported him as well as they 
a:mz, bat o.l'dou dei sa'po.tid him az wel az dei 
could, he suddenly fell to the ground. “If that is a 
kud\ hi: sAdnli fel ta da ground. “if dat iz a 
typical picture of an English public house, I’m sure 
tipikal pikt far av an igglif pAblik haus, aim fua 
that people break many glasses in this way,” said 
dat pi: pi breik meni gla.siz in dis wei,” sed 
Storm. “You are right,” Marshall replied, “thousands 
sto:m. “ju: a: rait” ma:fal ri' plaid, “pauzandz 
of glasses must get broken every year. But this is not 
ov gla:siz mast get broukn evri jia. bat dis iz not 
466 
The Forty-Seventh (47th) Chapter. 
a typical English pub; at least it is only typical of some 
a tipikdl iyglif pAb; dt li:st it iz ounli tipikdl dv saw 
pubs in the East End. But now, I think, we will leave 
pAbz in di i:st end. bat nau, ai piyk, ‘ zvi: wil li:v 
the East End, not because we’ve seen all that is to be 
di i:st end, njt bi'kaz 7vi:v si:n j:I Sat iz td bi: 
seen, but because our time is limited. I must say, Storm, 
si:n, l>3t bi'kaz and taim iz limitid. ai in.\st sei, stj:m, 
that I find the East End one of the most interesting 
(hi ai faind di i:st end 7 vau dv da moust intristiy 
parts of London.” 
pa :ts 37> l And an.” 
u Yes, that may be so, but you would not like to exchange 
'‘jrs. dcct mci bi: sou. bat ju: 7vad nat laik tu iks'tfeind^ 
your own suburb for this place, would you? You would 
jo:r oun SAba:b fa dis pleis, u'nd ju:? ju: 7Vdd 
not exchange your house for a house in the East End 
tut iks'tfcind 3 jj: Jums far 3 bans in di i:st end 
with another family living in it. But you said that our 
wid d'n\da fcemili liviy in it. bat. ju: sed dat ana 
time was limited as our programme was so long. What 
taim 7vaz limitid az ana prougrenn 7caz sou lay. hwat 
are we going to do now?” Marshall replied, looking at 
a: 7vi: gouiy ta du: nan?” ma:fal ri'plaid, lukiy at 
his watch, that it was an hour or two past lunch-time, 
biz 7oatf, dat it waz an auar a tu: pa:st l.\njtaini, 
and that before he could think of doing anything else, 
and dat bi'fa: hi: had piyh av du:iy enipiy cls. 
467 
Chapter Forty-Seven (47). 
they must have some lunch and a little rest, and later 
dei mast hcev sam Unf and a litl rest, and leita 
he would take Storm to church. “Without a visit to 
hi: wad teik sta:rn ta tja:tj. <c wid'aut a vizit tu 
a church,” he told Storm, “I can’t give you a really 
a tja.tf” hi: tould sta:m, “ai ka:nt giv ju: a riali 
typical picture of a Sunday in London. Before the first 
tipikal piktfar av a SAtidi in Undan. bi'fa: da fa:st 
world war the English were a church-going nation, and 
wa:ld wa: di ifjglij wa:r a tfa.tfgoniy neifan, and 
they still are, even if, perhaps, fewer people go to church 
dei stil a:, i:van if, pa'hceps, fju:a pi:pi gou ta tja:tj 
now. Most of those who go to church on Sundays, go 
nau. moust av douz hu: gou ta tja:tj an SAndiz, gou 
because they really want to and feel that they could 
bikaz dei riali want tu and fi:l dat dei lend 
not do without it, but there are, of course, some who 
nat du: wid'aut it, bat dear a:, av ka:s, savi hu: 
proper = right 
only go because they think it the proper thing to do. 
ounli gou bi'kaz dei pirjk it da prapa piy tadu:. 
Their parents and grandparents went to church, and 
dea pear ants and greendpearants went ta tfa:tf, and 
so they go, too.” 
sou dei gou, tu:” 
Storm: “Yes, in my country it is almost the same. Many 
sta:m: “jes, in mai k\ntri it iz a.'lnwust da seini. meni 
people, for example, go to church only on the twenty- 
pi:pl, far ig'za:mpl, gou ta tfa:tf ounli an da twenti- 
468 
The Forty-Seventh (47th) Chapter. 
fourth or the twenty-fifth of December, because they 
'fo:p o: dd twenti'fifp dv di'sembd, bi'kjz dei 
think it the proper thing to do, or, perhaps, because 
pivjk it dd prjpd pig td du:, o:, pd'hccps, bi'kjz 
they have always done so; -but there are, of course, 
dei hdv j.lwdz d\n sou; bdt dedr a:, dv kj:s, 
also a great many people who go to church every Sunday 
j. lsou d greit metii pi:pi hu: you td tfd:tf evri SAudi 
because they really want to.” 
bi'kdz dei ridli wont tu” 
It took the two friends more time to get through their 
it tuk dd tu: frendz du: tairn td get pru: ded 
lunch than they had expected. They spent more than 
/.a;?/ ddn dei hdd ikspektid. dei spent mo: ddn 
two hours eating and reading the Sunday papers. “We 
tu: audz i:tiy diid ri.diy dd s\ndi peipdz. “u'i: 
are a little late now,” Marshall said. “There is a service 
a:r d litl leit nau,” ma:jdl sed. (C ddz d sd:vis 
in a church a quarter of an hour’s walk from here, so 
in d tfd:tf d kwo:tdr dv dn audz u'D.k frdm hid, sou 
we must hurry.” When they reached the church, the 
ivi: mdst liAri.” hwen dei ri:tft dd tfd.'tf, dd 
service had already begun, and the clergyman had 
sd:vis hdd j.Vredi bi'gAn, dnd dd kh:dymdn hdd 
just appeared. Before the clergyman began to speak, 
d^Ast d'pidd. bi'fd: dd kld:d^imdn bi'gcrn td spi: k\ 
however, Marshall found time to say to Storm in a very 
hau'ei’d, ma:fdl found taiin td sei td sto:m in o vcrx 
469 
Chapter Forty-Seven (47). 
low voice: “Listen carefully, now! You will hear many 
lou vais: “lisn keafuli , nau! ju: wil hid meni 
strange old expressions that are not in use any more, 
streind 3 onld iks'prefdnz ddt a: nat in ju:s eni rna:, 
but a clergyman usually speaks so slowly in church 
bdt d kld:d%imdn ju:$udli spi:ks sou slouli in tfd:tj 
and in such a loud voice, that I have no doubt you will 
dnd in s.\tj d laud vais, ddt ai hdv non daut ju: wil 
be able to hear and find out the meaning of most of 
bi: eibl td hid dnd faind aut dd mi:niy dv rnoust dv 
the words and expressions. You will recognize the 
dd wd:ds dnd iks'prefdnz. ju: toil rekdgnaiz dd 
matter he is speaking about, of course, and that will 
mcetd hi: iz spi:kiy d'baut , dv kj:s , dnd dcct wil 
help, too.” The clergyman had a strong voice, that 
help, tu:. 3) dd kh:dymdn herd d stray vais, ddt 
sounded rather pleasant, and it was quite an experience 
soundid^ ra:da pleznt, dnd it zvaz kzvait dn iks'pidridns 
for Storm to hear the many old English words and 
fd sta:m td hid dd meni ould iyylif zvdulz dnd 
expressions which sounded very strange and also very 
iks'prejdnz Jnvitj sound-id veri streind 3 dnd j:lsou veri 
beautiful to his ears, as he told Marshall after the 
bju.tdful td hiz idz, dz hi: tould ma:fdl a:ftd dd 
service was over. 
Sd'.vis ZOdZ OltZ'd. 
470 
Shortly after seven they left the church and went to 
fa:tli a:ftd sevn dei left do tfo:tf and zvent tu 
The Forty-Seventh (47th) Chapter. 
a restaurant for a cup of tea. “We’ve had a very busy 
a restar a :y far a k\p av ti:. “wi:v heed a veri bizi 
day,” said Storm, “and I think that your programme 
dei,” sed stj:m, “and ai piyk dat jj: prougrcem 
could hardly have been better.” “Do you think, per- 
kad hu:dli hav bi:n beta” “du: ju: piyk, pa- 
haps,” Marshall asked, “that our programme is finished 
'keeps,” mcr.fal a:skt, “dat ana prougrcem iz f ini ft 
already? Just as soon as we’ve had enough tea and 
a :/' red if d$ASt az su:n az wi:v heed i'nxf ti: and 
bread and butter, we will go and see a good film.” 
bred and b.\ta, wi: wil gou and si: a gud film” 
“See a good film!” said Storm in great surprise; “you 
“si: a gud film!” sed sta:m in greit sa'praiz: “ju: 
must have forgotten that the cinemas are closed to-day.” 
mast hav fa'gain dat da sinimaz a: klouzd ta'dei” 
“That is again the strange idea that foreigners have of 
“deet iz a'gcin da streind 3 ai'dia dat farinaz hcev av 
England. There are in all far more than 200 
iygland. dear in a:l fa: ma: dan tit: h\ndrad 
towns in England, in which the cinemas are open on 
taunz in iy gland, in hwitf da sinimaz a:r oupan an 
Sundays.” 
SAndiz” 
They went to a cinema in Leicester Square, and before 
dei went tu a sinima in lest a skwca, and bi'fa: 
going in, stood for a time on one of the four sides of 
gouiy in, stud far a taim an w\n av da fa: saidz av 
square 
471 
Chapter Forty-Seven (47). 
the square, looking at the great number of very bright 
da skwrd, lukiij at da yreit iwmbar av vcri brait 
lights outside most of the buildings. The lights were 
laits 'aitt'said moust av da bildiyz. da la its wa: 
so bright that it was almost like daylight. They went 
sou brait dat it zvaz a:lmoust laik deilait. dci went 
inside the cinema, which was so comfortable that it 
'in'said da sinima, hzvitj zoaz sou kAinfatabl dat it 
was almost like a palace. The prices were rather high, 
waz j'.lmoust laik a perils, da praisiz wa: ra:da hai , 
but Marshall told Storm that they must pay for all the 
bat ma:fal tould sta:m dat dci mast pci far a:l da 
comforts. “If you want to have all modern comforts, 
k\mfats. “if ju: want ta heev a:l nudan kxmfats, 
you’ll usually find that you have to pay for them in 
ju:l ju'.yidli faind dat ju: heev ta pel fa: dam in 
some way or other.” 
saw, wei a:r Ada.” 
They saw a war film, and when they left the cinema, 
dei sa: a wa: film, and hwen dei left da sinima, 
they agreed that they did not wish to see any more 
dei a'gri:d dat dei did nat wif ta si: eni ma: 
war films for a long time to come. It was about an 
zva: filmz far a lay taim ta kAm. it zvaz a'baut an 
Englishman who had been taken by the Germans, but 
iijglifman hit: had bi:n teikn bai da d^a.rnanz, bat 
after a lot of trouble he had got away from them and 
a:ftar a lat av tr\bl hi: had gat a'zvei fratn dam and 
472 
The Forty-Seventh (47th) Chapter. 
escaped to Sweden, where he received a shock on 
is'keipt ta sun: (in, Invea hi: ri'si:vd a jjk m 
hearing that both his parents were dead, and that his 
hiariy dat boitj) his pear ants wa: (led, and dat his 
wife had run away with another man. Marshall: “I have 
waif had rxn a'wci wid a'nAda mcen. ma:fal: “ai iuev 
a brother who also escaped from Germany during the 
a hr\da hu: a.lsou is'keipt fram d^a.mani djuariy da 
war; but I am glad to say that nothing unpleasant had 
wa:: bat ai am gUcd ta sci dat n.xpiy xn'plesnt had 
taken place in his family which might give him a shock 
teikn pleis in his f(cmili hwitf wait giv him a jak 
when he got back.’* 
hwen hi: gat luck." 
When they got home that evening, Storm thanked his 
hwen dei gat Iwum dcct i.vniy . sta.in pccykt his 
guide and said, “I’m sure this has been the most 
gaid and sed . “aim Jua dis has bi:n da monst 
interesting Sunday I have spent for a long time, full 
intristiy sxndi ai hav spent far a lay taint, fid 
of surprises from morning till night.” 
av sa'praisis frani ma.niy til twit ." 
Marshall’s parents had gone to bed, but as he and Storm 
ma:jals pear ants had gan ta bed, bat ecs hi: and sta:m 
were both hungry after their long and tiring day, they 
wa: boup liAtjgri a:fta dca lay and taiariy dei, dei 
went into the kitchen, where they found some cold 
went inta da kit fin, hive a dei found saw kould 
473 
Chapter Forty-Seven (47). 
supper which Mrs. Marshall had left for them. They 
SApd hwitj misis ma:fal had left fa: dam. dei 
made themselves some tea to drink with their supper. 
meid dam'selvz sam ti: ta driyk zvid dea s.\pa. 
WORDS: 
condition 
store 
cat 
domestic 
loose 
chain 
smell 
smelt 
tail 
programme 
purpose 
public house 
pub 
smash 
support 
break 
broke 
broken 
limited 
proper 
service 
clergyman 
expression 
sound (verb) 
square 
EXERCISE A. 
Most people in the East End live under bad —. In the 
East End fruit is sold cheap, and the prices arc — than 
in the suburbs. A very large shop, selling all kinds of 
goods, is called a —. In the East End dogs and other — 
animals are sold in the streets. It is not allowed to let 
a dog go —, but it is taken away on a —. The friends 
could — that animals were sold in these streets. Some 
kinds of dogs have part of their — cut off. Their — for 
the day was very long, because it was Marshall’s — to 
show Storm as much as possible. In a — they saw a 
man — his glass to pieces. It was difficult for him to 
stand, and his friends had to — him. Storm thought 
that many glasses were — in this way. They soon had 
to leave the East End. Many Englishmen find it the — 
thing to go to church and listen to a — on Sundays. 
Storm was able to understand most of the words and 
— used by the clergyman. The clergyman’s voice — 
pleasant. The friends went to a cinema in Leicester — 
to see a —. The light outside the building was almost 
as — as —, and inside there were all modern —. The 
film was about an Englishman who — from Germany 
to Sweden, where he received a — when hearing that 
his parents were dead, and that his wife had left him. 
474 
The Forty-Seventh (47th) Chapter. 
EXERCISE B. 
In chapter 44, Exercise D, you found a letter from 
Storm to his friend Wood. Please answer this letter as 
if you were Wood, in such a way that you use all the 
words in the following list: 
than — letter — sister — receive — send — require — 
Brown — office — evening — discussion — pleasant — 
photograph — visit — London. 
You will have to make up some sort of story in which 
these words appear. This will give you practice in ex¬ 
pressing yourself in English. 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
We have some words which we call pronouns \prou- 
nciunz J. Pronouns are words like I, you, his, this, which, 
somebody. Pronouns may be put instead of nouns. 
Here are some examples: The man gave the boy an 
apple, and he ate it at once. In the sentence ‘and he 
ate it at once’ we see that ‘he’ is used instead of ‘boy 5 
and ‘it 5 instead of ‘apple 5 . In the sentence ‘John took 
the books and put them into his bag 5 , ‘them 5 is used 
instead of ‘books 5 , and ‘his 5 is used instead of ‘John's 5 . 
There are different kinds of pronouns. The words: 
I, you, he, she, it, me, you, him, her, it, we, you, they, 
us, you, them, we call the personal \pa:snl\ pronouns, 
because they are mostly used instead of persons. Ex¬ 
amples: John has a dog, which he likes very much. 
film 
bright 
daylight 
comfort 
escape 
shock 
unpleasant 
475 
Chapter Forty-Seven (47). 
(‘He’ is used instead of ‘John*.) The boys ran after 
the cat, until they got it. (‘They’ is used instead of 
‘boys’, and ‘it’ instead of ‘cat’.) 
We have also some pronouns called possessive \pa { zesiv\ 
pronouns; there are two kinds of possessive pronouns: 
firstly, my, your, his, her, its, our, your, their; secondly, 
mine, yours, his, hers, its, ours, yours, theirs. You will 
notice that the words in the second list have added 
an s, except ‘my’, which becomes ‘mine’, and ‘his’ and 
‘its’, which have an s already. 
The pronouns first mentioned are used with a noun, 
and the pronouns last mentioned are used when no 
noun follows. In the sentence ‘I showed him my house’, 
‘my’ is used with the noun ‘house’, but in the sentence 
‘I have shown him mine’, no noun follows, so the word 
‘mine’ is used instead of ‘my’. Here are some other 
examples: This is her hat; where is yours? Your garden 
is small, ours is big. It is her book — no, it is his. It is 
his ball — no, it is hers. 
Questions: 
Can you give some examples of pronouns? . . . What 
different sorts of pronouns do you know? . . . How are 
pronouns used? ... In what way are the two kinds of 
possessive pronouns different? . . . Please write a few 
sentences where a possessive pronoun is used together 
with a noun, and some where a possessive pronoun is 
used without a noun. . . . 
476 
Chapter Forty-Eight (48). 
The Forty-Eighth (48th) Chapter. 
ENGLISH NEWSPAPERS 
Storm: “While I know a great deal about the things 
sta:m: “hwail ai nou a greit di:l a 1 bant da piyz 
that happen in my own country, I am afraid that I don’t 
dat hcepn in mai oun k\ntri, ai aw a'freid dat ai dount 
know very much about events that happen in other 
nou vcri niAtf a'bant i vents dat hcepn in Ada 
countries, so I think that in the future I had better read 
IcAntriz, sou ai piyk dat in da fju.tfa ai had beta ri:d 
an English newspaper every day. In that way I should 
an iyglif nju.speipa evri dei. in dcet wei ai fad 
also get to know more about what the English think 
a.lsou get ta nou ma:r a'baut hwat di iyglif piyk 
about things; I should learn the opinions of the English. 
a'baut piyz; ai fad la:n di a'pinjanz av di iyglif . 
I am sure that one of the best ways to learn the opinions 
ai am fua dat wah av da best wciz ta la:n di a'pinjanz 
of a foreign nation is to read the newspapers of the 
av a farm neifan iz ta ri:d da nju:speipaz av da 
country. Living in England, as I do now, I think I ought 
kAntri. liviy in it/gland. azaidu: nau, ai piyk ai a:t 
to know more about the nation. I think it’s almost my 
ta nou wa:r a'baut da neifan. ai piyk its a.lmoust mai 
duty to learn all that I can about the English. 5 ' 
dju.ti ta la:n a:l dat ai keen a'baut di iyglif 
event — thing 
that happens 
happen = take 
place 
the future = the 
time to come 
He ought, 
he ought, — 
[j:t, j:t]. 
duty = the work 
or the things a 
person ought to do 
477 
Chapter Forty-Eight (48). 
putting it too 
strongly = making 
too much out of it 
“You don’t really mean what you say, do you?” asked 
“ju: daunt riali wi:n live at ju: sei, du: ju:?” a:skt 
Marshall. “You cannot be serious; you must be saying 
ma.jdl. “ju: kccnat hi: sidrids; ju: mast hi: seiitj 
this just in fun.” “No, not in fun; I am serious all 
dis d'jAst in f a n.” “non, nat in f ah; ai am siarias a:l 
right; I mean just what I say,” replied Storm. “It is 
rait; ai mi:n d^\st hu'jt ai sei” ri'plaid sta:m . “it iz 
very pleasant,” said Marshall, “to hear that you take 
vcri pleznt” sed ma:fal, “ta hia dat ju: teik 
such an interest in us, but I think that you are putting 
SAtj an intrist in as, bat ai pirjk dat ju: a: putiy 
it too strongly when you say that you ought to know 
it tu: strayli hwen ju: sei dat ju: a:t ta non 
all about us, just because you live here for a few 
a:I a'baut as, d^ASt bi'kaz ju: liv hia far a fju: 
months. If I had a chance of living in your country, 
niAnps. if ai heed a tfa:ns av liviy in ja: kAntri, 
I don’t think I should look upon it as my duty to make 
ai daunt piyk ai fad Ink a'pan it az mui dju.ti ta meik 
a study of the people and the conditions under which 
a st Adi av da pi:pl and da kan'difanz And a hzvitf 
they live, although, on the other hand, I might be glad 
dei l iv, a:Vdou, an di Ada hcend, ai mait bi: ylced 
to learn a few things about them. You will find, Storm, 
ta la:n a fju: piyz a'baut dam. ju: wil faind, sta:m, 
that all nations know much more about themselves than 
dat a:l neifanz non m\tf ma:r a'baut dam'selvz dan 
478 
The Forty-Eighth (48th) Chapter. 
about each other. We might say that this is inter- 
d'baut i:tj \da. wi: wait sci ddt dis iz inta- 
national, for it is to be seen in every country. But if 
'nee f anal, far it iz ta bi: si:n in evri k\ntri. bat if 
you do take such a great interest in the English, it 
ju: du: teik s\tj a greit intrist in di iyglif, it 
would be a good idea for you to read an English paper 
wad bi: a gad ai'dia fa ju: ta ri:d an iyglif peipar 
in future, both while you are staying in England and 
in fjictfa, bonp hwail ju: a: steiiy in iygland and 
when you return to your own country.” 
hiven ju: rita:n ta ja:r oun k\ntri. 3} 
Storm: “I have heard the names of quite a number of 
sta:m: “ai hav ha:d da neiniz av kzvait a nAinbar ov 
English papers, but it is hard for me to remember them, 
iyglif peipaz, bat it iz haul fa mi: ta ri'mcwba daw, 
because I have such a bad memory for foreign names.” 
bi'kaz ai Inez’ swtf a bced wewari fa farin neimz . 33 
Marshall: “While working at the office, I have not found 
ma:fal: “hwail wa:kiy at di jfis, ai hav nat faund 
your memory so poor. Fve sometimes been quite sur- 
jj: memari sou pua. aiv SAintaimz bi:n kwait sa- 
prised at the things you can remember. It is always 
'praizd at da piyz ju: kan ri'memba. it iz a:lwaz 
difficult, however, to remember a lot of foreign names.” 
difikalt, hau'eva, ta ri'membar a ht av farin neimz ” 
Storm: “You English seem to read a great number of 
sta:m: “ju: iyglif si:w ta ri:d a greit n\mbar av 
do take (here) = 
really take 
in future = in the 
future 
479 
Chapter Forty-Eight (48). 
papers. Many of the men at the office sometimes buy 
peipas . meni av da men at di afis s Amt aims bai 
two or three papers a day. Is that because they're so 
tu: a pri: peipas a dei. is dcet bi'kas dea sou 
interested in the latest news?” 
intristid in da leitist nju:s?” 
on account of = 
because of 
Marshall: “Not always; in most cases it is on account 
ma:fal: “nat a:hvas; in moust keisis it is on a'kaunt 
paje 
of their interest in sport. The evening papers usually 
av dear intrist in spa:t. di i:vnirj peipas ju:^uali 
have several pages, and in most cases only two or three 
hcev sevral peidys, and in moust keisis ounli tu: a pri: 
of the pages have news; on the rest there are reports 
av da peidys hcev nju:s; an da rest dea ri'pa:ts 
of big events in sport. But there is a limit to the 
av big ivents in spa:t. bat das a limit ta da 
number of papers one can comfortably read, so I am 
nAmbar av peipas w\n kan kAinfatabli ri:d, sou ai am 
mot 
sure that the people who buy so many papers on days 
fua dat da pi:pi hu: bai sou meni peipas an dels 
when a horse-race, a bicycle-race, or a big football match 
hwen a ha.sreis , a baisiklreis, a:r a big futba:l mcetj 
takes place, only read a few words on each page. I 
teiks pleis, ounli ri:d a fju: wa:ds an i:tj peidy ai 
care about = feel 
interested in 
don't care much about the many pages of sport, myself; 
dount kea niAtf a'baut da meni peidy s av spa:t, mat self; 
I'm more interested in the rest of the paper. There 
aim ma:r intristuf in da rest av da peipa. das 
480 
The Forty-Eighth (48th) Chapter. 
is one thing particularly that I always read. Perhaps 
wah piy pa'tikjulali dat ai a.lwaz ri:d. pa'haps 
you have already noticed the many letters to the editor 
ju: hav ad'redi noutist da meni letaz ta di edit a 
in our papers? People from all parts of the country 
in aua peipaz? pi:pi frani a:l pa:ts av da kAntri 
write letters to the papers and give their opinions about 
mit letaz ta da peipaz and giv dear a'pinjanz a'haut 
all sorts of things. Some of the letters are quite 
o. 7 sa.ts av piyz. saw av da letaz a: kwait 
interesting, but in most cases, of course, they are very 
intristiy. hat in moust keisiz, av ka:s, dei a: veri 
funny, because the letter-writers don’t know enough 
f.\ni, bi'kaz da letaraitaz dount non i'tiAf 
about the things they write about. However, people 
a'haut da piyz dei rait a'haut. hau'eva , pi:pl 
in England have been doing this for so long that it has 
in iygland hav hi:n du:iy dis fa sou lay dat it haz 
become almost an English institution.” 
hi'kAm a.lmoust an iyglif insti'tju:fan.” 
The newspapers of a country are spoken of as the press, 
da nju:speipaz - av a kAntri a: spoukan av az da pres , 
and Storm now wanted Marshall to give him some 
and sta:m nan wantid ma.fal ta giv him sam 
information about the English press. “You will, perhaps, 
infa'meijan a'haut di iyglif pres, “ju: wil, pa'hceps . 
be able to make a good suggestion as to which paper 
hi: cihl ta meik a gud sa'd^estfan az ta hwitf peipa 
editor = the head 
of a newspaper 
481 
Chapter Forty-Eight (48). 
will be the best for me.” “Yes, I could easily do that,” 
wil bi: da best fj: mi:.” “jes, ai kdd i:zili du: dcet,” 
Marshall replied, “but I have a better suggestion to 
ma.jal ri'plaid, “bat ai hcev d beta sa'd^estjan ta 
make. I will first tell you the most important details 
meik. ai wil fa:st tel ju: da moust im x pa:tant di:teilz 
suggest = propose 
about the papers, and then I suggest that you try a few 
a'baut da peipaz, and den ai sa'dyst dat ju: trai a fju: 
of them. In quite a short time you’ll discover which 
av dam. in kwait a fa:t taim ju:l dis'kAva hwitf 
one you can read to best advantage.” 
w\n ju: kan ri:d ta best ad'va:ntid 3 .” 
Storm answered that he would do as Marshall suggested, 
stj'.m a:nsad dat hi: wad du: az ma:fal sa'd^estid, 
and Marshall went on, saying, “You mentioned that 
and ma:jal went an, seiirj, “ju: menfand dat 
you would like to know more about the opinions of 
ju: wad laik ta nou ma:r a'baut di a'pinjanz av 
the English, but, of course, you understand that not all 
di iyglij, bAt, av ka:s, ju: Anda'stcend dat nat a:l 
Englishmen have the same opinion. In Parliament we 
iyglifman hcev da seim a'pinjan. in pa:lamant wi: 
have a very good example of this. Those who are of 
hcev a veri gud ig'za:mpl av dis. douz hu: a:r av 
the same opinion, and have the same programme for 
da seim a'pin j an, and hcev da seim prougrcem fa 
what they want to do for the good of the country, are 
hwat dei want ta du: fa da gud av da kAntri, a: 
482 
The Forty-Eighth (48th) Chapter. 
spoken of as a political party, while what they want 
spoukan av az a pa'litikal pa:ti, hwail hzvat dei zvant 
to do is spoken of as their political programme. 
ta du: iz spoukan av az dr a pa'litikal prougrcem. 
“The most important men of the largest party usually 
“da moust im'pa:tant men av da la.dyst pa:fi ju:$uali 
make up the government of the country; and it is the 
rneik a p da g\z'anmant av da k\ntri; and it iz da 
duty of the government to look after the affairs of the 
dju.ti av da (/.wanwant ta Ink cr.fta di a'feaz av da 
nation. In England we have three large political 
neifan. in iygland z vi: here pri: Ici'd^ pa'litikal 
parties: the Labour Party, the Conservatives, and the 
pn:tiz: da leiba pa:ti, da kan'sa.vativz , and da 
Liberals. All the papers that I shall mention to you, 
libaralz. a:l da peipaz dat ai fal men fan ta ju:, 
give the opinions of one or other of these three large 
giv di a'pinjanz az’ zvaii a:r Ada av di:z pri: lu:d 3 
political parties, although they are not owned by the 
pa'litikal pa.tiz, a:l'don dei a: nat ound bai da 
parties. I will begin with the Daily Telegraph, as I 
pcr.tiz. ai uni hi'gin zmd da deili teligra:f az ai 
have a copy of it in my pocket. Of course, you have 
hcrz• a kapi av it in mai pakit. av ka:s, ju: haz f 
seen it many times before, and you know what it is 
si:n it meni taimz bi'fa:. and ju: non lizvat it iz 
like. It has a circulation of about a million, and is, 
laik. it hcez a sa:kju'leifan az> a'buut a niiljan, and iz. 
affair = matter 
labour = work 
the telegraph is 
used for sending 
telegrams 
483 
Chapter Forty-Eight (48). 
the past — the time 
that has passed 
as you’ll have seen, a very Conservative paper. Two 
az ju:l hav si:n, a veri kansa:vativ peipd. tu: 
other important Conservative papers are the Daily Mail 
Add im'po:tant kan'sa:vativ peipaz a: da deili meil 
and the Daily Express, the first with a circulation 
and da deili iks'pres . da fa:st void a sa:kju'leifan 
of 2,000,000, and the second with a circulation of 
az' tu: miljan, and da sekand wid a sa:kju'leifan av 
3,800,000.” 
pri: miljan eit liAiidrad pauzand." 
Storm: “I can’t understand that you have not men- 
sto:m: “ai ka:nt Anda'stcend dat ju: hav not men¬ 
tioned The Times. It is almost the only English 
fand da taimz. it iz o.lmoust di ounli iyglij 
paper ever mentioned at home.” Marshall: “The Times 
peipar eva menfand at houm” ma.jal: “da taimz 
has a circulation of about 300,000.” Storm: 
hcez a sa.kju'leijan av a'baut pri: hAndrad pauzand ” sto:m: 
“Has The Times only a circulation of 300,000?” 
“hccz da taimz ounli a sa. kju'leifan av pri: hAndrad pauzand?” 
Marshall: “Most foreigners are inclined to think that 
ma:jal: “moust fjrinaz a:r in'klaind ta piyk dat 
The Times is the paper with the largest circulation. The 
do taimz iz do peipd wid da la:dyst sa:kju'leifan. da 
reason for this is that many times in the past it has given 
ri.zn fa dis iz dot mcni taimz in da pa:st it haz cjivn 
the opinion of the British government, and on account 
di o'pinjon av do hritif cjAvanmant , and on a'kaunt 
484 
The Forty-Eighth (48th) Chapter. 
of this fact it is, of course, one of the most important 
av dis fcekt it iz , av ka:s, zvaii av da moust im'paitant 
papers, even though it is not one of the biggest. The 
peipaz , iivan don it iz nat zvaii av da bigist. da 
biggest Liberal paper is called the News Chronicle with 
bigist libaral pcipar iz lea:Id dd njui2 kranikl zvid 
a circulation of 1,750,000. 
a saikju'leifan av zvaii miljan sevn JiAndrad and fifti pauzand. 
Then I must mention the Labour paper, called the 
den ai mast men fan da leiba peipa , kaild da 
Daily Herald, a paper with a circulation of over 
deili herald , a peipa zvid a saikju'leifan av ouva 
2,250,000. In 1918 
tu: miljan tu: h And rad and fifti pauzand. in nainti:n eiti:n 
it was a small paper with a circulation of only 
it zvaz a small peipa zvid a saikju'leifan av ounli 
100,000, but its growth has been so rapid 
WAn JiAtidrad pauzand, bat its group Jiaz him sou rccpid 
that already in 1939 its circulation had in- 
dat aiVredi in naintim paiti'nain its saikju'leifan had in¬ 
creased to twenty times as much.” 
'kriist ta tzventi taimz az niAtf 
a What a growth!” said Storm; “I have heard of papers 
“hzvat a group!” sed staun; ({ ai haz• ha id av peipaz 
growing quickly, but never of such a rapid growth as 
grouifj kzvikii, bat nevar av s\tf a rcepid group az 
that.” “In your place,” Marshall continued, “I should 
dcet” “in jo: pleis” maifal kantinjmd, “ai fad 
chronicle = report 
herald = one who 
tells news 
rapid — fast 
485 
Chapter Forty-Eight (48). 
buy a copy of each of these different papers. It is best 
bdi o kopi ov i:tf ov di:z d if rant peipoz. it iz best 
for you to decide for yourself which one you are going 
fd ju: td di'said fa jo.'self hwitf wau ju: a: gouiy 
to read. In all the papers I’ve mentioned you’ll find 
td ri:d. in o:l do peipoz aiv mcnfond ju:l faind 
long articles about home affairs, and about foreign 
toy a:tiklz o'bant houm o'feoz, ond o'baut for in 
affairs as well. I haven’t said anything about the 
o'feoz oz wel. ai hccvnt scd cnipiy o'baut di 
evening papers, as I don’t think they will interest you; 
r.vniy peipoz, oz ai dount piyk dci v'il intrist ju:; 
they are almost full of articles about sport.” Storm: 
dci a:r oAmoust ful ov a:tikiz o'baut spo:tsto:m: 
“I am inclined to think you are right. I shall keep to 
“ai out in'klaind to piyk ju: a: rait. ai fol ki:p to 
the morning papers and buy a copy of each of those 
do mo.niy peipoz ond bai o kopi ov i:t( ov douz 
you have suggested.” 
ju: hov so'd^estid." 
Marshall then told Storm that, with one or two 
nia: fol den tould sto: m dot. und wau o tu: 
exceptions, all the big papers are printed both in 
ik'scpfonz, o:l do big peipoz a: printid boup in 
London and in some town in the north of England at 
l And on ond in sam taun in do no:p ov iyglond ot 
the same time. “It is a good idea to print the papers 
do seim taim. "it iz o gud ai'dio to print do peipoz 
486 
The Forty-Eighth (48th) Chapter. 
in two places. A man in the north of England is then 
in tu: pleisiz. a wcni in da na:p av iy gland iz den 
able to get a copy of his paper just as quickly as a man 
eibl ta get a kapi av hiz peipa d^Ast az kunkli az a rncen 
in London,” he said. Storm: “I think that is a good 
in lAtidan” hi: sed. starm: “ai piyk dcet iz a gud 
thing. Nowadays it’s important to read newspapers.” 
pit). nauadeiz its ini'pa :t ant ta ri:d nju:speipaz. ,} 
“Yes, it is one of the ways in which people, if they 
“jes, it iz WAn av da weiz in hwitj pi:pl. if dei 
take things seriously, may learn more, and so continue 
teik pirjz siariasli, mei la:n ma:, and sou kan'tinju: 
their education after they have left school. Books, of 
dear edju.'keifan a.fta dei hav left sku:l. buks, av 
course, are a great help to people who wish to educate 
ka:s, a:r a greit help ta pi:pi hu: wif tu edju:keit 
themselves, but newspapers can do quite a lot. The 
dani'selvz, bat nju.speipaz kan du: kufait a lat. da 
papers, however, might do even more to give people 
peipaz, hau'eva, wait du: i:van ma: ta giv pi:pi 
a better education; but in our days there is a tendency 
a betar edju:'keifan; bat in ana deiz daz a tendansi 
to fill the papers with articles about sport and politics, 
ta fil da peipaz wid a:tiklz a'bant spa:t and palitiks, 
and to leave out things that might be more useful. 
and ta li:v aut piyz dat mait hi: ma: ju.sful. 
One notices this tendency more and more as the years 
w\n noutisiz dis tendansi ma:r and ma: az da jiaz 
487 
Chapter Forty-Eight (48). 
pass, and as it is the case in every country with hardly 
pa:s, and az it iz dd kcis in evri k\ntri mid ha:dli 
any exception, I think we might speak of it as an inter¬ 
im ik'sepfan, ai pirjk mi: mait spi:k dv it dz dn inta- 
national tendency.” “I see nothing wrong in reading 
'ncefanal tend ansi” “ai si: HApiy rjrj in ri.diy 
articles about politics,” Storm answered. “In a country 
a:tiklz a'baut pjlitiks” stj:m a:nsad. “in d kAntri 
where the people take part in the government of their 
hwsd dd pi:pi teik pa:t in dd gAvanmant dv dea 
country and any man may become a Member of 
kAntri dnd eni mcen mei bik\m d membdr dv 
Parliament, the more people know about politics, the 
pa:hmant . dd nv: pi:pi nou d'baut pjlitiks, dd 
better, in my opinion.” “There is something in what 
betd, in mai a'pin j an” “ddz sAinpiy in hwjt 
you say there,” was all that Marshall could say to this. 
ju: sei ded ,” Wdz j: 1 ddt ma:fdl kdd sei td dis. 
“Speaking of reading,” Storm continued, “I have noticed 
“spi:kifj dv ri.diy” sto:m kdn'tinju:d , “ai hdv noutist 
that there is not much space between the lines in your 
ddt ddz njf mAtf speis bi'twi:n da lainz in jj: 
papers. That is bad for one’s eyes, I think. But of 
peipdz. dcct iz bccd. fa WAnz aiz, ai piyk. bat av 
course, if you add up all the space saved between the 
kj:s, if ju: ccd Ap j:1 da speis seivd bi'twi:n da 
lines in this way, it comes to quite a lot, doesn’t it? 
lainz in dis mei, it kAmz td kwait a ht, dAznt itf 
488 
The Forty-Eighth (48th) Chapter. 
More reading matter for the same money! 
ma: ri.diy meet a fa da seim ihahU 
‘ Newspaper work interests me. I think that when I 
“ njii:speipa wa:k intrists mi:. ai piyk dat hwen ui 
know England and the English a little better, I shall 
non iy gland and di iyglif a litl beta, ai fal 
write some articles about England and try to send them 
mit sam a.tiklz a'baut iygland and trai ta send dam 
to one of our papers at home. So be careful what you 
ta wah av ana peipaz at houm. sou bi: keaful hwat ju: 
say and do from now on, Marshall; everything that you 
set and du: fram nan an, ma.jal: evripiy dat ju: 
say will be used against you! 5 ' “And I,” replied Marshall 
sei wit bi: ju:zd a'geinst ju:!” “and ai” rfplaid ma:fal 
with a smile, carefully folding up his Daily Telegraph 
wid a small, krafuli fouldiy \p hiz deili tcligrarf 
and putting it under his arm, “shall write an article 
and putiy it And a hiz a: m, “fal rait an a: tiki 
called “Educating a Young Foreigner in London” and 
ka:ld “ cdju: keitiy a j\y farina in l And an” and 
tell about all the funny questions you have asked me.” 
tel a'baut a:I da f\ni kwestjanz ju: hav a:skt mi:.” 
So saying, Marshall took his friend back to the office 
sou seiiy, ma:fal tuk hiz frend bcek ta di afis 
from the small restaurant where they had been having 
fram da sma:l restara.y hwea dei had bi:n heeviy 
lunch. Each had his paper folded under his arm. 
/am/. i:tj heed hiz peipa fouldid \nda hiz a:m. 
489 
Chapter Forty-Eight (48). 
WORDS: 
event 
happen 
opinion 
ought 
future 
serious 
duty 
memory 
case 
page 
on account of 
limit 
press 
suggestion 
suggest 
copy 
political 
party 
Conservatives 
Liberals 
Labour Party 
politics 
government 
affair 
inclined 
circulation 
growth 
rapid 
space 
fold 
exception 
print 
EXERCISE A. 
In order to know something about the — that happened 
in England and to learn what are the — of the English, 
Storm thought that he — to read an English newspaper 
every day in the —. He was quite — about it and said 
to Marshall that he thought it his — to do so. He did 
not remember many of the names of the English news¬ 
papers, because he had a bad — for foreign names. In 
most — the English evening papers have several —, 
only two or three of which bring news, while the — 
are given up to sport. On — of their interest m the big 
events in sport there is almost no — to the number of 
papers the English will buy. Storm asked Marshall for 
some information about the English — and for a good 
— as to which paper would be the best for him to read. 
Marshall — that he should buy a — of several of them, 
in order to decide which one would suit him best. In 
England there are three great — parties: the-, the 
—, and the —. What they wish to do for the — of the 
country, is spoken of as their —. It is the duty of the 
— to look after the — of the nation. People are — to 
think that the Times has a very great —, but in reality 
its circulation is not nearly so great as that of the Daily 
Herald. The — of the circulation of the Daily Herald 
has been very — since 1918. Storm found the English 
newspapers difficult to read on account of the small — 
between the lines. He thought it funny to see English¬ 
men walking with their papers carefully — under their 
arms. With only one or two — all the big papers are 
— in two towns at the same time. 
490 
The Forty-Eighth (48th) Chapter. 
EXERCISE B. 
Answer these questions with full sentences: 
Where do you live, in a flat or in a house of your own? 
... Do you like to be at home in the evenings, or do 
you prefer to go out? ... How many newspapers do you 
read a day, and what are the names of them? . .. Do 
you collect foreign stamps or coins? .. . How long have 
you been studying English? ... What are your reasons 
for studying English? .. . Did you ever make a trip to 
England? ... If you did, what part of England did you 
care (verb) 
education 
educate 
tendency 
article 
race 
daily 
telegraph 
chronicle 
herald 
editor 
past 
visit? .. . What part of England would you like to go 
to, if you were to go there during your holidays? .. . 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
We have mentioned two kinds of pronouns: the per¬ 
sonal and the possessive pronouns. Now we will talk 
about a third kind called the demonstrative | di'man- 
strativ ] pronouns. The demonstrative pronouns are: this, 
these; that, those. ‘This’ and ‘that’ are used in the singu¬ 
lar, and ‘these’ and ‘those’ are used in the plural. 
‘This’ and ‘these’ are used about persons or things that 
are near us, and ‘that’ and ‘those’ about persons or 
things that are farther away. Examples: This is my 
house, and that is Johnson’s, that is, the house here is 
my house, and the house over there is Johnson’s. This 
is my brother (here). That is Mr. Smith (over there). 
This book is one of the best I have read. That book is 
no good. This evening (to-day) I have come home early. 
That evening (some days ago) I came home very late. 
These shoes are very expensive, but those are cheaper. 
491 
Chapter Forty-Eight (48). 
Questions: 
Which of the demonstrative pronouns point at things 
near us? ... And which demonstrative pronouns point 
at things farther away? ... Which of the demonstrative 
pronouns are used in the singular, and which are used 
in the plural? ... 
EXERCISE D. 
siksti'eit . nelsn roud, zvimbldan. 
da fa: st av sap' te mb a. 
dia wud, 
ai was veri glced ta get da bceg ful av linin and \da pigs 
hwitf mai sista sent mi:. ai a.lmoust bi'li.v dat ju: helpt 
ha: ta peek it; a ga:l wad nova hav bi:n eibJ ta pink 
av a:I do us pigs. 
it is nais av ju: ta ruit and tel mi: hwat ju: and braun 
a: du:ig. ai am stil di'vaidig mai ha:t in i.kwal pa:ts bi- 
1 twi:n mai nju: zva:k and laif at houm , sou ai am veri 
intristid in da nju:z dat ju: send, wil ju: pli.s send mi: 
saw av da foutagra:fs fram aua trip, tu:? 
la:st scetadi ai went ta si: a geim av rxgbi futba:l, a 
veri streind 3 geim, ai kan tel ju:. ai ra:da gat di im'prejan 
dat a greit bcctl was birig fa:t far a f\ni kaind av ba:l, 
hwitf evribadi was traiig ta teik a'zvei fram evribadi els and 
kceri fram zv\n pleis tu a'ywda \nda his a:m! 
ai am la:nig meni nju: pigs at di afis, hwitf ai fal tel 
ju: a'baut in mai nekst leta. ri'memba mi: ta braun. pli:s. 
ja:s sin'siali. 
starm 
492 
Chapter Forty-Nine (49). 
The Forty-Ninth (49th) Chapter. 
A VISIT TO THE HARBOUR OF LONDON 
Storm had had a busy morning at the office; the 
sto:m had heed a bizi mo:niy at di of is; da 
manager's bell had rung for him at least five times. 
mcenid^az bel had rAy fa him at li:st faiv taimz. 
“The old man does nothing but ring his bell for me 
“di ould man dAZ nApiy bat riy hiz bel fa mi: 
this morning,” Storm said to Marshall. While he was 
dis mo:niy” sto:m sed ta ma:fal. hwail hi: waz 
speaking, the bell rang once more. When he had 
spiikiy, da bel ray WAns mo:. hwen hi: had 
entered the manager’s office, the manager began by 
entad da manid^az ofis, da manid^a bi'gcen bai 
saying, “You know that the harbour of London is the 
seiiy, “ju: nou dat da ha: bar av l And an iz da 
greatest harbour in existence, and that ships go from 
greitist ha:bar in ig'zistans, and dat fips gou fram 
there to all parts of the world; but have you ever 
dea tu o:l pa:ts av da wa:ld; bat hav ju: eva 
visited it? If not,” he continued, “there is a chance 
vizitid it? if not” hi: kan'tinju:d, “daz a tfa.ns 
for you to do so to-day. I want you to go down to a 
fa ju: ta du: sou ta l dei. ai wont ju: ta gou daun tu a 
ship lying in the harbour and speak to the captain of 
fip laiiy in da ha:ba and spi:k ta da kaptin av 
He rings, he rang, 
he has rung [rinz, 
rceri, rA>/J. 
the old man = a 
name used in fun 
by clerks about 
the manager 
bell 
ship 
493 
13/1 
Chapter Forty-Nine (49). 
authority = the 
right to decide 
things and give 
orders 
the boat. We often have trouble with him, because he 
da bout, wi: o:fn hcev trxbl wid him, bi'koz hi: 
decides things for the firm without asking us. If he 
di'saidz piyz fa da fa:m wid'aut a:skiy as. if hi: 
is in doubt about anything connected with the affairs 
iz in daut a'baut enipiy ka'nektid wid di a'feaz 
of the firm, he does not ask us what to do, but decides 
av da fa:m, hi: dAZ not a:sk as hwot ta du:, bat di'saidz 
the matter himself; it matters nothing to him that we’ve 
da mceta him'self; it mcetaz nApiy tu him dat wi:v 
never given him any authority to do so. But, of course, 
neva givn him eni o:'poriti ta du: sou. bAt, av ko:s, 
we cannot take the responsibility for what he does 
wi: kcenot teik da risponsa'biliti fa hwot hi: dAZ 
without being told by us. If the responsibility is to 
wid'aut bi:iy tould bai as. if da risponsa'biliti iz ta 
be ours, that is, if we are to pay for the goods and 
bi: auaz, deet iz, if wi: a: ta pei fa da gudz and 
anything that is done with them, he must ask us what 
enipiy dat iz Jaw ivid dam, hi: mast a:sk as hwot 
to do and not decide things on his own. It is very 
ta du: and not di'said piyz on hiz oun. it iz veri 
unpleasant to have anything to do with people like 
An'pleznt ta hcev enipiy ta du: wid pi:pi laik 
this captain, who do things without any authority from 
dis keep tin, hu: du: piyz wid'aut eni o:'poriti from 
those for whom they work. This man speaks English 
douz fa hu:m dei wa:k. dis meen spi'.ks iyglif 
494 
The Forty-Ninth (49th) Chapter. 
very poorly, but I hope that you’ll be able to make 
veri puali, bat ai houp ddt ju:l bi: eibl ta meik 
out what he says, for I want you to tell him that he 
aut hzvat hi: sez, far ai want ju: ta tel him dat hi: 
may give as many orders as he likes to the men on 
mei giv az meni a:daz az hi: laiks ta da men an 
his ship, but that if the firm has any orders to give, 
hiz fip, bat dat if da fa:m haz eni a:daz ta giv, 
I will give them. — We also want some goods that are 
ai mil giv dam. — wi: a:lsou want sam gudz dat a: 
lying in the harbour, and on which duty must be paid 
laiiy in da ha:ba, and an hwitj dju:ti mast bi: peid 
first. We need the goods badly, because we have sold 
fa.st. zvi: ni:d da gudz bcedli , bi'kaz zvi: hav sould 
all that we had, so that we have no more in stock. If 
a:l dat zvi: heed, sou dat zvi: hcev nou ma:r in stak. if 
an article sells well, it’s always best to have a good 
an a:tiki selz wel, its a:lzvaz best ta hcev a gud 
supply in stock. I will write out a cheque for the 
sa'plai in stak. ai veil rait aut a tfek fa di 
amount of money that will have to be paid in duty, 
a'maunt av mAni dat veil hcev ta bi: peid in dju:ti, 
and you can take it with you. The amount of the duty 
and ju: kan teik it zvid ju:. di a'maunt av da dju:ti 
is £ 10/9/6, and I will write out the cheque 
iz ten paundz nain and siks, and ai mil rait aut da tfek 
at once. You will remember, of course, to get a receipt 
at zvahs. ju: zvil ri'memba, av ka:s, ta get a ri'si:t 
13 / 2 
make out = un 
derstand 
We need the goods 
badly = we need 
the goods very 
much. 
cheque 
receipt 
41)5 
Chapter Forty-Nine (49). 
for the amount, so that our book-keeping department 
fa di d'maunt, sou dat and bukkiipiy dipa:tmant 
can see that the money has been paid.” 
kan si: dat da mAni haz bi:n peid” 
Storm promised to get a receipt for the cheque, and 
sta:m pramist ta get a ri'si:t fa da tfek, and 
mentioned that it would be his first visit to the harbour, 
menfand dat it wad bi: hiz fa:st vizit ta da ha:ba, 
after which he left the manager’s office. 
a:fta hwitf hi: left da mcenidyz afis. 
The man to whom he paid the money at the custom¬ 
er mcen ta hu:m hi: peid da mxni at da kAstam- 
house soon discovered that Storm was a foreigner, and 
haus su:n dis'kAvad dat sta:m waz a farina, and 
on hearing that it was his first visit to the harbour, 
an liiariy dat it waz hiz fa:st vizit ta da ha:ba, 
he offered to show him some of the things worth seeing 
hi: afad ta fou him sAm av da piyz wa:p si:iy 
there. The first building to which they came was used 
dea. da fa:st bildiy ta hwitf dei keim waz ju:zd 
to store corn. Storm’s new friend said that many of 
ta sta: ka:n. sta:mz nju: frend sed dat meni av 
grain = corn 
the buildings were used for grain. “What kind of grain 
da bildiyz wa: ju:zd fa grein. “hwat kaind av grein 
do you store here?” he asked the man. “There are 
dn: ju: sta: hia?” hi: cr.skt da mcen. “dea 
three or four important kinds,” he answered, “but by 
pri: a fa:r iin'pa:tant kaindz” hi: a.nsad, cc bat bai 
496 
The Forty-Ninth (49th) Chapter. 
far the most important is wheat, because most of the 
fa: da moust im'po:tant iz hwi:t, bi'koz moust av 3 b 
bread eaten in England is white bread. However, we 
bred i:tn in iy gland iz hwait bred. hau'eva, wi: 
don't produce enough wheat in England for our own 
dount pra'dju:s i'nAf hivi:t in iygland far auar oun 
supply, and although there is such a lot stored here, 
sa'plai, and o:l'dou daz SAtf a lot sto:d hia, 
it is not enough to supply the country with white bread 
it iz not i'nAf ta sa'plai da kAntri wid hwait bred 
for more than a month. Other countries have supplied 
fa mo: dan a mAnp. Ada kAntriz hav sa'plaid 
us with the greater part of our wheat for the last 
as wid da greita pa:t av aua hwi:t fa da la:st 
hundred years. At one time England was a country 
hAndrad jiaz. at WAn taim iy gland waz a kAntri 
with many farms and farmers, and as in those days 
wid meni fa:mz and fa:maz, and <ez in douz deiz 
there was more than enough wheat, we used to export 
dea waz mo: dan i'nAf hwi:t, wi: ju:st tu eks'po.t 
wheat to other countries. Then the rise of industries 
hwi:t tu Ada kAntriz. den da raiz av indastriz 
using a lot of machinery suddenly changed the whole 
ju:ziy a lot av ma'fi.nari sAdnli tfeind^d da houl 
picture, and one factory was built after another, so that 
piktfa, and WAn fcektari waz bilt a:ftar a'nAda, sou dat 
in our days England is most interested in her industries. 
in aua deiz iy gland iz moust intristid in ha:r indastriz. 
industry = the sy¬ 
stem of producing 
goods with the 
help of machines 
machinery = 
machines 
497 
Chapter Forty-Nine (49). 
woollen (here) = 
wool 
rat 
He feeds, he fed, 
he has fed [fi:dz, 
fed, fed]. 
The coal, steel, iron, cotton, and woollen industries are 
dd koul, sti:l, aidn, kotn, dnd wulin inddstriz a: 
by far the most important. I will now take you to a 
bai fa: dd moust im!po:tent. ax wil nau teik ju: tu d 
building that will, no doubt, interest you very much. 
bilditj ddt wil, nou daut, intrist ju: veri niAtf. 
In it we store the many different articles that come 
in it wi: sto: dd meni difrent a:tiklz ddt kAm 
from the East.” 
frdm di i:st.” 
As soon as they entered the building, Storm saw five 
dz su:n dz dei entdd dd bildirj, sto:m so: faiv 
or six cats and asked the man what they wanted cats 
d siks kats dnd a:skt dd man hwot dei wontid kats 
for. “These are very special cats — our fellow-workers, 
fo:. “di:z a: veri spefdl kcets — aud felouwe:koz, 
so to speak,” his guide explained. “The buildings here 
sou td spi:k ,” hiz gaid iks'pleind. “dd bildifjz hidr 
are all full of rats, and it is the duty of the cats to 
a: o:l ful dv rats, dnd it iz dd dju:ti ev dd kats td 
catch and eat the rats. We feed them once a day on 
katf dnd i:t dd rats, wi: fi:d ddm wahs d dei on 
fresh meat, not very much, of course, but just enough 
fref mi:t, not vert mAtf, ev ko:s, bet d^ASt i'nAf 
to make them feel that they belong to us. For the rest, 
td meik dem fi:l ddt dei bi'loy tu as. fd dd rest, 
they must catch rats, and as they all look nice and well 
dei mest katf rats, end ez dei o:l luk nais end wel 
The Forty-Ninth (49th) Chapter. 
fed, it seems that they are doing their work properly. 
fed, it si:mz dat dei a: du:iy dea wa:k propali. 
Some of the rats are very big and will sometimes even 
saw, av da rests a: veri big and wit SAmtaimz i:van 
bite a man’s leg. I was bitten by a rat once myself — 
bait a mcenz leg. ai waz bitn bai a rest wahs mai'self — 
He bites, he bit, he 
has bitten [baits, 
bit, bitn]. 
a very unpleasant experience, I can tell you.” 
a veri An'pleznt iks 1 piarians , ai kan tel ju:” 
Storm saw a man standing in front of a large box with 
sto:m so: a mcen stcendiy in frAnt av a la:d$ boks mid 
a hammer in his hand. He was using the hammer to 
a hcemar in hiz hcend. hi: waz ju:ziy da hcema tu 
open the box, on one of the sides of which were some 
oupan da boks, on wah av da saidz av hwitj wa: saw, 
very strange marks. Storm could not understand the 
veri streind 3 wa:ks. sto:m kad not Anda'stand da 
meaning of the marks, but was told that the box had 
mi:niff av da ma:ks, bat waz tould dat da boks had 
hammer 
come from the East, and that the marks must be in 
kAW fram di i:st, and dat da ma:ks mast bi: in 
some strange eastern language. This man had worked 
saw streind 3 i:stan laygwid 3 . dis mcen had wa:kt 
there for twenty-five years and knew almost all that 
dea fa twentifaiv jiaz and nju: o:lmoust o:l dat 
could be known about articles from the East; he was 
kad bi: noun a'baut a: tikis fram di i:st; hi: waz 
an expert at his work. There were a number of other 
an ekspa.t at hiz wa:k. dea zva:r a nAwbar av Ada 
an expert = a man 
of great experience 
in his work 
499 
Chapter Forty-Nine (49). 
men, too, who on account of many years’ experience 
men, tu:, hu: on a'kaunt dv meni jidz iks'piarians 
had become real experts at their work. Storm remained 
had bi'kAm rial ekspa:ts at dea wa:k. sto:m ri'meind 
in front of the box that was being opened, as he wanted 
in frAnt av da baks dat waz bi:iy oupand, az hi: wantid 
to see what it contained. After a few minutes, he saw 
ta si: hwat it kan x teind. a:ftar a fju: minits, hi: so: 
that it contained many eastern articles which are usually 
dat it kan'teind meni i:stan a:tiklz limitj a: ju:$ueli 
sold very cheap. The man, however, explained that 
sould veri tfi:p. da mcen, hau'eva, iks'pleind dat 
the articles were no longer so cheap as they used to be. 
di a:tiklz wa: nou layga sou tfi:p az dei ju:st ta bi:. 
They had always paid insurance on the goods, so that 
dei had a:\waz peid irijuarans an da gudz, sou dat 
if anything should happen to them on the way to Europe, 
if enipiy fad hapn ta dam an da wei ta juarap , 
the firm would receive money for the damage that had 
da fa:m wad ri'si:v mAni fa da damid$ dat had 
been done, but both during and after the war, they had 
bi:n dAn, bat boup djuariy and a:fta da wa:, dei had 
had to pay a much higher insurance on goods from 
had ta pei a mAtf haiar in'fuarans an gudz fram 
foreign countries. 
far in kAntriz. 
Storm noticed that the building had many large doors, 
sta:m noutist dat da bildiy had meni la:d$ da:z, 
500 
The Forty-Ninth (49th) Chapter. 
through which he could see some lorries and also a 
pru: hwitf hi: kdd si: sam hriz and a:lsou a 
horse and cart. Porters were busy taking goods to the 
Ju:s and ka:t. pa:taz wa: bizi teikiy gudz ta da 
doors, where the lorries and carts were being loaded. 
da:z, hwea da hriz and ka:ts wa: bi:iy loudid. 
Storm watched the porters at work for some minutes 
sta:m watft da pa:taz at wa:k fa s\m minits 
and then spoke to one of them, saying that it must be 
and den spouk ta wah av dam, seiiy dat it mast bi: 
hard work. “Yes, indeed it is, sir,” the porter replied. 
ha:d wa:k. <c jes, in'di.d it iz, sa:” da pa:ta rtplaid. 
“And if I had one pound in money for every pound I 
“and if ai heed wah paund in niAni far evri paund ai 
have loaded in weight, I should be a very rich man!” 
hav loudid in weit, ai fad bi: a veri ritf mcen!” 
Storm’s new friend now offered to show him down to 
sta.mz nju: frend nau a fad ta fou him daun ta 
the ship that he wanted to visit. On their way they 
da fip dat hi: wantid ta vizit. an dea wei dei 
saw a boat full of coal leaving the harbour. Storm: “The 
sa: a bout ful av koul li:viy da ha:ba. sta:m: “da 
ship is just as dirty and black as the coal itself.” “Yes, 
fip iz d^ASt az da:ti and blcck az da koul it'self.” “jes, 
black is the right colour for a ship carrying coal.” 
blcek iz da rait kAla far a fip kceriiy koul” 
Storm: “Look, there are two small boats just in front 
sta:m: “luk , dea tu: sma:l bouts d^ASt in fr\nt 
load = put 
goods on 
indeed = really 
carrying coal = 
loaded with coal 
501 
Chapter Forty-Nine (49). 
Where is she bound 
for = where is she 
going to? 
He ships, 
he shipped, 
he has shipped. 
of her, pulling her along! They’re called tugs, aren’t 
av ha:, puliy ha:r a'lay! dea ka:ld t\gz, a:nt 
they? Do you know where she is bound for?” “She is 
dei? du: jit: nou hwea fi: iz bound fa:?” “fi: iz 
bound for Scandinavia, for one of the countries with 
bound fa skandi'neivja , fa wah av da hwntriz zvid 
little or no coal. The two small boats are called tugs 
litl a: nou koul. da tu: sma:l bouts o: ka:ld t\gz 
all right. They’re pulling her out into the middle of 
a:l rait. dea puliy ha:r out inta da midi av 
the river.” “I don’t understand why coal is shipped 
da riva” “ai dount Anda'stand hwai koul iz fipt 
from London,” said Storm, “because all the mines from 
fram Undan” sed sta:m , cc bi'kaz a:l da mainz fram 
which the coal is taken are much farther north.” “They 
hwitf da koul iz teikn a: niAtf fa:da na:p” C( dei 
usually ship the coal from some place near the coal 
ju.^uali fip da koul fram SAm pleis nia da koul 
mines, but now and then it’s shipped from London,” the 
mainz, bat nau and den its fipt fram l And an” da 
man replied. 
man rtplaid. 
When at last they reached the ship that Storm was 
hwen at la:st dei ri:tjt da fip dat sta:m waz 
looking for, he saw two sailors painting the side of the 
lukitj fa:, hi: sa: tu: seilaz peintiy da said av da 
ship with black paint. Storm turned to his friend, and 
fip wid blak peint. sta:m ta:nd ta hiz frend, and 
502 
The Forty-Ninth (49th) Chapter. 
said, “We have now passed five or six ships, and on 
sed, “ivi: hav nau pa:st faiv a siks Sips, and an 
all of them one or two sailors have been painting. Have 
a:l av dam w\n a tu: seilaz h<w bi:n peintiy. luci' 
sailors nothing else to do but to paint the sides of their 
seilaz n\piy els ta du: bat ta point da saids av dea 
ships?” He called to the two sailors, asking them if 
Sips?” hi: ka:ld ta da tu: seilaz, o.skiy dam if 
the captain was on board. On hearing that he was, 
da k(optin waz an ba:d. an hiariy dat hi: was, 
Storm said good-bye to his guide, and went on board. 
sta:m sod gud'bai ta his gciid, and went an ba:d. 
He found the captain standing with another officer of 
hi: found da kceptin stcendiy wid a'n\dar afisa av 
the ship. When Storm had introduced himself, the 
da fip. hwcn sta:m had intra'dju:st him'self, di 
officer walked away, and Storm began to tell the cap- 
afisa wa:kt a'wei, and sta:m bi'gcen ta tel da keep - 
tain what the manager had said. The captain soon got 
tin hwat da mcenid^a had sed. da kceptin su:n gat 
very angry and said to Storm, “I’m a man who has 
veri ccygri and sed ta sta:m, “aim a mcen hu: has 
sailed all the oceans of the world, and yet your manager, 
seild a:l di on fans av da we: Id, and jet ja: mcenid^a, 
who sits in his office all day, sends me his foolish 
hu: sits in his afis a:l dei, sends mi: his fu:lif 
orders.” 
a:daz. 3) 
officer 
ocean = sea 
13/3 
503 
Chapter Forty-Nine (49). 
grew (here) = got 
trade = business 
However, after Storm had explained in detail why it 
hau'cva, a:ftd stj:m had iks'pleind in di'.teil hwai it 
was important that the captain should never decide 
zvaz ini pa :tant dat da keep tin fad v neva di'said 
anything for the firm on his own, the captain grew 
cnipiij fa da fa:m an hiz oun, da kceptin gru: 
quieter and promised to do only what he was told. 
kwaiata and pramist ta du: ounli hwat hi: zvaz tould. 
“I will do as your manager wishes,” he said. “The 
“ai wil du: az fa: mcenid^a wifiz,” hi: sed. “da 
trade between England and my country is very great, 
treid bi'twirn iygland and mai kwntri iz veri greit, 
and I hope that I may help to make the two countries 
and ai ho up dat ai mei help ta meik da tu: kxntriz 
buy still more from each other, so that the trade may 
bai stil wa: frain i:tf Ada, sou dat da treid mei 
become still greater.” 
bi'kAin stil greita” 
When Storm returned to the office, the manager thanked 
hwen sta:m ri'ta:nd ta di afis, da mcenid^a pceykt 
him for what he had done. 
him fa hwat hi: had d\n. 
EXERCISE A. 
While Storm was speaking to Marshall, the manager 
— the — for him and said that he wanted him to go 
down to a — lying in the — and speak to the — of the 
504 
The Forty-Ninth (49th) Chapter. 
boat. The captain often decided things for the firm 
on his —, although he had no — to do so. The manager 
hoped that Storm would be able to-what the 
captain said. He also asked him to go and pay the — 
on some goods. Then he wrote a — for the — of money 
that had to be paid in duty and told Storm to get a — 
for the cheque. Near the harbour Storm saw many 
buildings which were used for storing —. He learned 
that most of the grain which was — in the buildings 
was —, and that foreign countries — England with the 
greater part of her wheat. England has great cotton and 
woollen —. Storm's friend told him that as there were 
many — in the buildings, they had to keep cats, which 
were — on fresh meat. He had once been — by a rat. 
Storm saw a man using a — to open a box with strange 
— on its sides. The man was an — at his work and 
soon got it opened, and then Storm saw that it — many 
eastern articles. These goods were not so cheap now 
on account of the higher — that had to be paid. Through 
the doors of the building Storm saw some — and a horse 
and — which were being — with goods. A dirty — ship 
was leaving the harbour — along by two small boats. 
Storm learned that sometimes coal is — from London, 
and that this ship was — for Scandinavia. “But most 
of the coal is shipped from places near the coal —,” 
Storm's new friend said. 
EXERCISE B. 
Write 200—300 words about a trade with a foreign 
country that has to do with your work in some way. 
WORDS: 
bell 
ring 
rang 
rung 
harbour 
ship 
ship (verb) 
captain 
responsibility 
authority 
make out 
cheque 
amount 
receipt 
stock 
store (verb) 
grain 
wheat 
supply (verb) 
industry 
machinery 
rat 
feed 
fed 
bite 
bit 
bitten 
hammer 
mark 
expert 
contain 
insurance 
lorry 
cart 
load 
black 
505 
Chapter Forty-Nine (49). 
bound 
pull 
mine 
paint 
paint (verb) 
sailor 
officer 
ocean 
trade 
indeed 
Scandinavia 
tug 
There is sure to be something or other that you use in 
your work which comes from a foreign country. Tell 
us as much as you know about where it comes from, 
and how it gets here. Explain everything as well as 
you can in your own words. 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
The words who, whom, whose, which, are called rela¬ 
tive [reldtiv] pronouns. Here is an example to show 
you how they are used: It is the postman who brings 
the letters in the morning. In this sentence there are 
two parts: ‘It is the postman’ and ‘who brings the letters 
in the morning’. The relative pronoun who in the last 
part is connected with and takes the place of the word 
‘postman’ in the first part. 
Now, these relative pronouns are not all used in the 
same way. From the following examples you will see 
that who, whom, whose are used about persons, and 
that which is used about animals and things. You will 
also notice that who is used about the person who does 
or is something, but that whom is used about the person 
to whom something is done or happens, while whose 
is used about the person to whom something belongs. 
Examples: The man who found the boy was very old. 
The dog which found the boy was very old. The woman 
whom I saw yesterday was very old. The dog which 
I saw yesterday was very old. The book which I bought 
to-day was very dear. There comes the girl whose 
brother is ill. 
506 
The Forty-Ninth (49th) Chapter. 
Instead of .who, whom, and which in the examples 
given we might have put that, which may also be used 
as a relative pronoun, both when we speak of persons 
and when we speak of animals or things. Here are 
some examples: Here comes the man that lives in the 
new house. It was his wife that I saw yesterday. Is 
this the cat that your mother gave you? 
‘My father, whom you saw yesterday, has left for Lon¬ 
don this morning.’ ‘Buckingham Palace, which is one 
of the finest buildings in London, is the home of the 
King and Queen.’ In these sentences, where the rela¬ 
tive pronoun is connected with and takes the place of 
the name of a thing or person, well-known beforehand, 
we cannot use that, but only the pronouns who (whom, 
whose) and which. 
Notice that you may leave out the relative pronoun 
altogether when it takes the place of the person, 
the animal, or the thing that something is done to. 
Examples: It was his wife I saw yesterday. Is this the 
cat your mother gave you? 
Questions: 
What words are called relative pronouns? ... Which 
relative pronouns do we use when speaking of per¬ 
sons? ... And which do we use when speaking of ani¬ 
mals or things? ... What word may be used instead of 
the relative pronouns ‘who’, ‘whom’, and ‘which’? ... 
Can you give an example of how the pronoun ‘whom’ 
is used? ..: What is the genitive of the relative pronoun 
‘who’? ... Can you give an example of how it is used? .. 
507 
Chapter Fifty (50). 
The Fiftieth (50th) Chapter. 
regard = look at 
among = in the 
number of 
DIRTY BUSINESS 
“What have you got there? 5 ' Marshall asked, noticing 
“hwjt hav jit: gat deaf” ma:fdl a:skt, noutisiy 
something that Storm was taking out of his pocket as 
SAmpiy dat sta.m waz teikiy aut av hiz pakit az 
they sat down to their lunch. “Stamps, 55 came the 
dei sect claim td dra I.\nf. “steemps” keim da 
reply. “Let’s have a look at them, 55 Marshall said, 
ri'plai. <( lcts hav a Ink at dam” mcv.fal seel, 
with the ready interest of a fellow-collector. Storm 
wid da redi intrist av a 'felouka'lekta. starm 
placed the stamps on the table, and Marshall began to 
plcist da steemps an da teibl, and mcr.jal bi'gecn ta 
go through them. He took up one at a time, held it 
gou pru: dam. hi: tuk Ap wah at a taim, held it 
up to the light, and regarded it carefully from all sides. 
Ap ta da lait, and ri'ga:did it keafuli fram a:l saidz. 
At last he picked out three among them and asked, 
at la:st hi: pikt aut pri: a'niAy dam and a:skt, 
“Who sold them to you?” “Why?” Storm wanted to 
“//■«: sould dam ta jit:?” “hwai?” sta:m wantid ta 
know. “Is there anything wrong with them?” “I 
non. “iz dar enipiy ray wid dam?” “ai 
should say there is,” Marshall replied. “As far as I’m 
fad sci dar iz,” ma:fal ri'plaid. t£ az fa:r az aim 
508 
The Fiftieth (50th) Chapter. 
able to judge, there are at least three false stamps 
cibl ta d^Ad^, dear at li:st pri: fj:ls stamps 
among them.” Storm regarded Marshall with surprise 
a'niArj dam . 33 sta:m riga:did ma:jal wid sa'praiz 
in his eyes: “But the owner of the stamp-shop told me 
in his aiz: <{ bat di ounar av da stampfap tould mi: 
on his word of honour that they were real and worth 
an hiz wa:d av ana dat dei wa: rial and zva:p 
the money. I must say that I don’t know very much 
da mAtii. ai mast sei dat ai dount nou veri mAtf 
about stamps from that country, so I wasn’t able to 
a'baut stamps fram dat kAntri, son ai waznt eibl ta 
judge for myself, but the owner was such a nice old 
d^Ad^ fa mai'self, bat di ouna zvaz SAtj a nais ould 
man, and I really felt that he was telling me the truth 
man, and ai riali felt dat hi: zvaz telirj mi: da tru:p 
about those stamps. It was that little shop with 
a'baut douz stamps. it zvaz dat litl jap zvid 
stamps and coins a few houses from the office, you 
stamps and kainz a fju: hauziz fram di afis, ju: 
know.” “I thought so!” said Marshall. “Word of 
nou . 33 “ai pa:t sou ! 33 sed ma:jal. “zva:d av 
honour! That man doesn’t know what the word 
ana! dat man dxznt nou hzvat da zva:d 
‘honour’ means. He won’t tell the truth about anything 
*ana y mi:nz. hi: zvount tel da tru:p a'baut enipifj 
if he thinks he can make money by lying about it. It 
if hi: piyks hi: kan meik niAni bai laiitj a'baut it. it 
truth = what is 
not false 
He lies, he lied, 
he has lied 
[lais, laid, laid J 
to lie — lying 
r >0f) 
Chapter Fifty (50). 
former = earlier 
was the same with the former owner of the shop; he 
was da seim wid da fa:mar ounar av da jap; hi: 
either = any 
(of two) 
was just as bad as this one; you can’t trust those two 
ivaz d$Ast as heed as dis wah; ju: ka:nt tr\st Sous tu: 
men. You should never believe anything that either 
men. ju: fad nova bi'li:v empty dat aidar 
of them says. I went there once to buy some Roman 
av dam ses. ai went dea waiis ta bai sam rouman 
coins in order to start a collection. I didn’t know much 
kains in a:da ta sta:t a ka'lckfan. ai didnt non iiiAtj 
about coins at that time and was not able to judge the 
a [ baut kains at deet taint and was nat eibl ta d^Ad^ da 
quality of two silver pieces the man showed me, so I 
kwaliti av tu: silva pi:sis da nuen foud mi:, sou ai 
had to trust his word that the coins were real old 
heed ta trAst his wa:d dat da kains wa: rial ould 
Roman pieces. Some months later I was showing 
rouman pi:sis. s\m niAnps leita ai was fouiy 
my new little collection to a friend, an expert in the 
mai nju: litl ka'lekfan tu a frend, an ekspa:t in da 
matter of coins; and do you know what? He was 
nice tar av kains: and du: ju: non hwat? hi: was 
able to pick out two false pieces among the coins, and 
eibl ta pik aut tu: fa:ls pi:sis a'mAy da kains, and 
they were the ones which that lying old man, the former 
dei wa: da waiis hwitf deet laiiy ould meen, da fa:mar 
owner of the shop, had sold me. No, you can’t trust 
ounar av da jap , had sould mi:. non, ju: ka:nt tiwst 
510 
The Fiftieth (50th) Chapter. 
either of those men. Now, of course, I’ve learned some 
aidar bv douz men. nan, av ko:s, aiv la.nd sahi 
of the ways to judge of the quality of a coin; when you 
dv da weiz td d$Ad$ av da kwoliti av a koin; hwen ju: 
drop it, for instance, you can often hear if it’s false or 
dr Dp it, far instans, ju: kan o:fn hiar if its fo:ls a 
not.” “But I don’t understand their motives for doing motive = reason 
not” “bat ai dount Atida'stcend dea moutivz fa du:iy 
things like that,” Storm said. “Even if they do earn a 
fiyz laik dcet” sto:m sed. (C i:van if dei du: am a 
few shillings more one day by saying something which 
fju: filiyz mo: ivah dei bai seiiy sAtnpiy hwitf 
isn’t correct, they’re sure to make their customers angry, correct = right 
iznt ka'rekt, dea fua ta meik dea kAstamaz cerjgri, 
so that they never return. Such business methods 
sou dat dei neva ri'tarn. sAtf biznis mepadz 
can’t be very good.” “No, of course not,” Marshall 
ka:nt bi: veri gud ” (< nou, av ko:s not ” ma:fal 
replied. “I say, let’s go and have some fun with him! 
ri [ plaid. “ai sei, lets gou and hcev sarn /am wid him! 
He doesn’t know me; I might go in and try to make 
hi: dAznt non mi:; ai mait gou in and trai ta meik 
him buy back those stamps. Shall we?” “There’s 
him bai bcek douz stcemps. feel wi:?” “daz 
no keeping you down,” Storm answered with a laugh; 
nou ki:piy ju: daun,” storm a.nsad wid a la:f; 
“but how will you do it? 5 
“bat hau wU ju: du: it? 
“I don’t quite know, yet. 
“ai dount kzvait nou , jet. 
511 
Chapter Fifty (50). 
a man of property 
= a rich man 
perfect = which 
cannot be better 
perform — do 
admire = look 
up to 
act — thing done 
Persons like our kind friend with the false stamps 
pdisnz laik and kaind frend wid dd fo:ls stamps 
usually have great respect for people with money, so 
ju.^udli hdv yrcit ris'pckt fd pi:pl wid m\ni, sou 
perhaps I might tell him a story about being a young 
pd'haps ai wait tel him d stj:ri d'baut bi:iy d jAy 
man of property, who has become interested in stamps 
man dv prjpdti, hu: hdz bi'kAin intristid in stamps 
and wants to buy a whole collection at once. What 
dnd wmts td bai d houl kd'lekfdn dt zvahs. hwot 
do you think of that?” Marshall asked. “The plan 
du: ju: piyk dv dat?” ma:fdl a:skt. “dd plan 
seems perfect to me,” Storm answered. “I can find 
si:mz pd'.fikt td mi:” std:m arnsdd. “ai kdn faind 
nothing wrong with it, if you think you can perform 
tiApiy rjy wid it, if ju: piyk ju: kdn pd'fo.ni 
your part of the fun. I must say that I admire your 
jj: pa:t dv dd fAti. ai ntAst sei ddt ai dd'maid jj: 
courage. I’m sure I couldn’t go through with it without 
kArid 3. aim fud ai kudnt gou pru: wid it wid'ant 
showing by some word or act that I was making fun 
jouiy bai sahi wdul o:r akt ddt ai wdz meikiy fAn 
of him.” “Well, to tell the truth,” Marshall replied, 
dv him” “wel , td tel dd tru:p” ma:jol riplaid, 
“I’m a little afraid, myself. And I have to support my 
“aim d litl o'freid, mai'self. dnd ai hav td so'po:t mai 
self-respect by telling myself that our motives in this 
'sclfris'pekt bai teliy mai'self dot aud moutivz in dis 
512 
The Fiftieth (50th) Chapter. 
foolish affair are perfectly pure! — Well, here we are 
fu:lif a'fea a: pd:fiktli pjud! — wel, hia wi: a:r 
at the shop. You wait outside for me!” 
dt da fap. ju: weit 'aut'said fa: mi :! 33 
A quarter of an hour later Marshall appeared again at 
a kzva.tar av an aua leita ma.fal a'piad a'gein at 
the door of the shop. He was smiling all over his face, 
da da:r av da fap. hi: waz smailirj a:l ouva hiz feis, 
so Storm could understand that everything had gone 
sou sta:m kad .\nda'stcend dat evripiy had gan 
well. As soon as they had turned round the corner, 
wel. az sum az del had tamd round da ka:na, 
Marshall had to stop and have a good laugh, before 
tna.'fal heed ta stap and hcev a gud la:f, bi'fa: 
he was able to tell Storm what had taken place in 
hi: waz cibl ta tel sta:m hwat had teikn pleis in 
the shop. 
da fap. 
“First,” Marshall said, “I told him my name was 
(i fa:st , 33 ma:fal sed, “ai tould him mai neim waz 
Reginald Willoughby, just returned from India, where 
red^inald zvilabi , d^Ast ri'tamd fram indja, hwear 
I had been hunting lions, or whatever it is one hunts 
ai had bi:n JiAntirj laianz, a: hwat'evar it iz wah hAnts 
in India. There are lions in India, aren’t there? This llOll 1 
in indja. dear a: laianz in indja, amt deaf dis 
seemed to make a deep impression upon him, especially 
si:md ta meik a di:p im'prefan a'pan him, is'pefali 
513 
Chapter Fifty (50). 
when I began speaking about the stamp-collection that 
hwen ai bi'gcen spi:kit) a'baut dd 'stcempka'lekfan ddt 
I was planning to start. His behaviour at once showed 
aizvaz plcenitj ta sta:t . his bi'heivja at zvahs fond 
great respect, and he gave me to understand that he 
greit ris'pekt, and hi: geiv mi: tu Anda'stcend dat hi: 
would think it a privilege to be allowed to help me 
zvad pifjk it a privilid 3 ta bi: a'laud ta help mi: 
to find the very best stamps for my collection. I told 
ta faind da veri best stcemps fa mai ka'lekfan. ai tould 
him all about ‘my life in India’: that I had visited the 
him o:l a'baut i mai Jaif in indja 9 : dat ai had vizitid da 
court of a famous prince in India and had been invited 
ka:t av a feimas prins in indja and had bi:n in'vaitid 
to stay at his palace, where I lived like a prince among 
ta stei at hiz pcelis, hzvear ai livd laik a prins a'mAy 
the real princes — he had seven sons and four brothers! 
da rial prinsiz — hi: had sevn SAnz and fa: brAdaz! 
It was perfectly clear from my words and behaviour 
it zvaz pa:fiktli klia fram mai zva:dz and bi'heivja 
that I wasn’t very clever and knew nothing at all about 
dat ai zvaznt veri kleva and nju: nApitj at a:l a'baut 
stamps. He brought out all kinds of stamps, and when 
stcemps. hi: bra:t aut a:l kaindz av stcemps, and hzven 
he saw that I showed an interest in those from India, 
hi: sa: dat ai joud an intrist in douz fram indja, 
he gave me a lot of information about them, only half 
hi: geiv mi: a lat av infa'meifan a'baut dam, ounli ha:f 
514 
The Fiftieth (50th) Chapter. 
of which was correct; the rest had very little to do 
av hwitj was ka'rekt; da rest had veri lit! ta du: 
with the truth. I ‘believed’ every word, of course, 
wid 3a tru:p. ai *bili:vd 9 evri wa:d, av ko:s, 
and I could see from the look in his eyes that he 
and ai kad si: frarn da Ink in his ais dat hi: 
thought he was going to get a nice bit of good English 
po:t hi: was gouxvj ta get a nais bit av gud iyglif 
money out of me. The more foolish my words were, 
niAni ant av mi:. da mo: fu:lij mai wa:ds wa:, 
and the more foolish things I did, the more he seemed 
and da mo: fu:lij pirjz ai did, da mo: hi: si:md 
to admire and respect me. I tell you, I had such trouble 
tu ad'maiar and ris'pckt mi:, ai tel ju:, ai had SAtf trAbl 
trying not to laugh that I was quite weak. 
traiiy not ta la:f dat ai was kwait wi:k. 
weak = not strong 
“At last I thought the right time had come to take out 
i( 3t la:st ai po:t da rait taim had kAm ta teik aut 
your false stamps. ‘Look here!’ I said; Tve just bought 
jo: fo:ls stamps. *luk hio!’ ai sed; ( aiv d^ASt bo:t 
some very fine stamps from a friend, but as you have 
sam veri fain stcemps fram a frend, bat cez ju: hav 
made me much more interested in Indian stamps now, 
meid mi: niAtf mo:r intristid in indjan stamps nau, 
Indian = from 
India 
perhaps you would like to buy these?’ He grew a bit 
pa 1 haps ju: wad laik ta bai di:sf y hi: gru: a bit 
cool at that, so I started for the door, as if I wanted to 
ku:l at dat, sou ai sta:tid fa da do:, as if ai wontid ta 
515 
Chapter Fifty (50). 
drop the whole matter. At once, his humour changed, 
drop do houl meet a. of 1 vxns, hie hjicma tfehidyl, 
and he was all smiles again and doing his best to keep 
and hi: waz o:l smoile a'gein and du:iy hie best ta ki:p 
an important customer. ‘Hem, how much have you paid 
an im'po.tant k.Astama. ( hm. hnu m\tf hov ju: peid 
for them?’ he asked, opening the drawer where he kept 
fo: dam? y hi: a:skt, oupaniy da dro:a hwra hi: kept 
his money, as if he w r as going to pay for them at once. 
hie THAni, az if hi: wae gouiij ta Pei fo: daw at w.uis. 
‘A pound, 5 I replied, thinking it better to add something 
< a pound, y ai ri'plaid, piykiy it beta tu ced sxmpiy 
quite (here) = 
I agree 
to the amount. ‘Well, I can’t give you as much as that, 
ta di a'mount. 'wcl, ai ka:nt giv ju: ae mxtf ae deet, 
of course, 5 he answered; ‘I have to sell them again, you 
av ko:s, y hi: a:nsad; c ai hcev ta sel dam a'gein, ju: 
know. 5 ‘Oh, quite, 5 I said; ‘I understand that perfectly. 
nou y ‘ ou, kzvait / ai sed: l ai Aiida'stcrnd dcct pa:fiktli. 
Shall we say fifteen shillings? That will satisfy us both. 5 
jal wi: sei fifti:n filiye? deet uni scetisfai as bouf. y 
He had a hard time pulling himself together, poor 
hi: had a ha:d taim puliy him'self ta'geda, pua 
fellow! Just think of it — to have to take back the 
felon! d^Ast piyk av it — ta hcev ta teik bcek da 
false stamps he himself had sold! And he couldn’t very 
fo:ls stcemps hi: him'self had sould! and hi: kudnt veri 
well say anything, because I might find out that it was 
wel sei enipiy , bi'koe ai mait faind aut dat it waz 
516 
The Fiftieth (50th) Chapter. 
he who had sold them. I was having the time of my 
hi: hn: had sould dam. ai waz haviy da taint av mai 
life, I tell you. 
laif, ai tel ju:. 
“Well, he tried to get out of paying any money to me, 
“wel, hi: traid ta get aut av peiiy eni m\ni ta mi:, 
of course, by suggesting that when I had decided what 
av ka:s, bai sa'd^estiy dat hwen ai had di'saidid hwat 
stamps I wanted, I could pay that amount less. ‘Yes, 
stamps ai wantid, ai kad pei dat a'maunt les. *jes, 
just as you wish,’ I said; ‘that's perfectly all right. 
dfy\st az ju: wij y ai sed; c dats pa:fiktli o:l rait. 
I can pay for everything when I come for the stamps, 
ai kan pei far evripiy hwen ai k\m fa da stamps, 
then. You see, I should like you to put them in the 
den. ju: si:, ai fad laik ju: ta put dam in da 
right order for me, put them in a book, you know, and 
rait a:da fa: mi:, put dam in a buk, ju: non, and 
all that. You do that, too, don't you?’ ‘Yes, it will cost 
a:l dat. ju: du: dat, tu:, dount ju :? 9 l jes, it wil hast 
a bit extra, of course,’ he answered. ‘Of course!’ 
a bit ekstra, av ka:s, y hi: a.nsad. € av ka:s! y 
I replied. 
ai ri'plaid. 
“We looked at the stamps again, and I told him some 
“wi: lukt at da stamps a'gein, and ai tould him sam 
more ‘facts’ about myself: I had returned to look after 
ma: *fakts y a l baut mai'self: ai had ritarnd ta luk a:fta 
517 
Chapter Fifty (50). 
property = that 
which is owned 
sense = under¬ 
standing 
He drank it all up 
= he believed all 
of it. 
some property in Scotland that had become mine after 
sam propati in skit fond dat had bi'k\m main a:ftar 
an uncle. To be sure, it was very strange for me to 
an Aykl. ta bi: fua, it was veri streind 3 fa mi: ta 
be back in England after having lived for more than 
bi: bcek in iygland a:fta hceviy livd fa mo: dan 
a year at the court of an Indian prince. Out there, 
a jia at da ko:t av an indjan prins. aut dea, 
there had been five men just to look after the rooms 
dea had bi:n faiv men d$ASt ta Ink a:fta da ru:ms 
and the clothes of each guest at the palace, and to see 
and da klouds av i:tf gest at da pads, and ta si: 
that their masters had everything they wanted. But 
dat dea ma.stas had evripiy dei ivonfid. bat 
here I felt that I was hardly master of my own house — 
hia ai felt dat ai was ha:dli ma:star av mai oun haus — 
the housemaids did as they wanted to, etc. 
da hausmeids did as dei wontid tn, it'setra. 
“You should have heard me, Storm! One would think 
“ju: fad hav ha:d mi:, sto:m! wah wad piyk 
that any one with just the usual amount of common 
dat eni wah wid d^Ast da ju:$ual a x maunt av koman 
sense would be able to see through my foolish behaviour 
sens wad bi: eibl ta si: pru: mai fu:lif bi'heivja 
and my stories. But not he! He drank it all up! 
and mai storris. bat not hi:! hi: drayk it o:l Ap! 
“When I had ‘chosen’ a lot of expensive stamps and was 
l( hwen ai had ‘ tjousn 9 a lot av iks'pensiv stamps and was 
518 
The Fiftieth (50th) Chapter. 
going to leave, I ‘discovered’ that I had very little 
gouty ta li:v, ai 'dis'kAvad ’ dat ai had vert litl 
money in my pocket, and said that as this was the case, 
m.\ni in mai pakit, and sed dat az dis waz da keis, 
perhaps it was just as well if he paid the fifteen shillings 
pa'haps it waz d$Ast az ivel if hi: peid da fifti:n jilirjz 
now. He had to do it, of course, and here’s the money!” 
nau . hi: had ta du: it, av ka:s, and hiaz da mAni!” 
“Nice work, Marshall, although a bit thick!” Storm 
“nais wa:k, ma:fal, a:l'dou a bit pik!” sta:m 
was able to say at last, when he had stopped laughing. 
waz eibl ta sei at la.st, hwen hi: had stapt la:firj. 
“I shouldn’t have been able to perform an act like that. 
“ai fudnt hav bi:n eibl ta pa'fa.m an akt laik dat. 
I’m sorry I couldn’t be there myself. He must have 
aim sari at kudnt bi: dea mai'self. hi: mast hav 
very little common sense to believe a story like that. 
veri litl kaman sens ta bi'li.v a sta:ri laik dat. 
But no doubt he will be brought to his senses again 
bat nou daut hi: wil bi: bra:t ta hiz sensiz a'gein 
in a few days, when no Reginald Willoughby appears 
in a fju: deiz, hwen nou redynald wilabi a'piaz 
to buy his Indian stamps, and then he will begin to 
ta bai hiz indjan stamps, and den hi: wil bi'gin ta 
put two and two together. Perhaps that will teach him 
put tu: and tu: ta'geda. pa'haps dat ivil ti:tf him 
not to sell false stamps in future.” 
nat ta sel fa:ls stamps in fju:tfa.” 
a bit thick = 
almost too much 
519 
Chapter Fifty (50). 
They decided to go home by train, but at the station 
dei cli'saidid ta gou hoam bai trein , bat at da steifan 
a railwayman told them that there would be no trains 
a reikueiman tould dam dat dra wad bi: non treinz 
for the next two hours, as a train had run into an 
fa da nekst tu: auaz, az a trein had yah intu an 
empty carriage at the station and almost smashed it up. 
emti kcerid 3 at da steifan and a.'lmoust sm<Tft it \p. 
It had to be taken away piece by piece, which a lot of 
it heed ta bi: teikn a'wei pi:s bai pi:s, hwitf a ht av 
workers were now doing. The information that the 
wa:kaz wa: nau du:iy. di infa'meifan dat da 
railwayman gave them made them change their plans. 
reikueiman geiv dam meid dam tfeind 3 dea plcenz. 
But they were not sorry, as it was Saturday afternoon 
bat dei wa: nat sari, az it waz seetadi a:fta'nu:n 
and they were just in the humour for doing something 
and dei wa: d$ASt in da hju:ma fa du:iij SAinpitj 
else and not for going home. “I know the best way 
els and nat fa gonirj houm. “ai non da best wei 
of spending the next two hours,” Storm said. “If it 
av spendiy da nekst tu: auaz” sta:m sed. “if it 
isn’t too much trouble, I should like you to go with 
isnt tu: niAtf tr\bl, ai fad laik jit: ta gou wid 
me to a good tailor’s in the suburbs to order a new suit. 
mi: tu a gud teilaz in da SAba:bz tu a:dar a nju: sju:t. 
It seems to me that I must have grown bigger since 
it si.niz ta mi: dat ai mast hav groan biga sins 
520 
The Fiftieth (50th) Chapter. 
I came to England; my clothes don’t fit me any longer. 
ai keim tn iygland; mai kloudz dount fit mi: eni layga. 
Another reason is that the manager has invited me to 
a'nxda ri.zn iz dat da mcenidy haz in'vaitid mi: ta 
dinner at his home in a month’s time, and I should 
dinar at hiz houm in a niAnps taim . and ai fad 
like to look my best that evening, in a really well-fitting 
laik ta Ink mai best deet i:vniy, in a riali zvelfitiy 
suit.” “Oh, I see!” replied Marshall. “You want to 
sju:t” <( ou . ai si:!” ri'plaid ma:fal. “ju: want ta 
shine before the weaker sex in the person of Marion. 
fain bi'fa: da wi:ka seks in da pa:sn av mccrian. 
The old story of the stronger sex trying to make an 
di ould stand av da strayga seks traiiy ta meik an 
impression on the weaker sex! But I thought the 
ini'pre fan an da wi:ka seks! bat ai pa:t da 
dinner was going to be a big affair with all the guests 
dina 7 vaz gouiy ta bi: a big a'fea wid a:l da gests 
in dinner-jackets?” “No, it’s just a small dinner-party 
in dinadyckits?” <c non, its dy\st a sma:l dinapa:ti 
with only the family and two or three guests, so no 
wid ounl-i da fcemili and tu: a pri: gests, sou nou 
stand-up collar will be necessary. I don’t like stiff 
'stand-\p kala wil bi: nesisari. ai dount laik stif 
collars. Not only are they so stiff that I can hardly 
kalaz. nat ounli a: dei sou stif dat ai kan ha.dli 
turn my head, but I feel that my whole body gets stiff 
ta:n mai hed, bat ai fi:l dat mai houl badi gets stif 
sex 
There are two 
sexes, men and 
women. 
s/and-up 
collar 
521 
Chapter Fifty (50). 
when I wear one, and I move about like a schoolboy 
hwen ai zvea w\n, and ai mu:v a'baut laik a sku:lbai 
at his first party.” “Yes, I feel like that, too. So 
at hiz fa:st pa:ti” “jcs, ai fill laik dcet, tu:. son 
you're going to a family-dinner at the manager's! I 
jua gouirj tu a fcemilidinar at da mcunid^az! ai 
wonder who put the idea into his head to ask you to 
zvAnda hit: put di ai'dia inta hiz hed tu a:sk ju: ta 
dinner.” “You're all wrong there. It's a privilege 
dina. }> :c juar o:l ratj dca. its a privilid$ 
I’ve earned for myself by the clever work I've per- 
aiv a:nd fa mai'self bai da kleva wa:k aiv pa- 
formed and by my bright conversation!” “Oh, stop 
x fa:md and bai mai brait kanva'seifan!” “ou, stop 
a second, stop a second, my poor friend!” Marshall 
a sekand, stop a sekand, mai pua frend!” ma:Jal 
said. “Rule number one for ‘the perfect gentleman’: 
sed. “ru:l iiAinba w\n fa *da pa:fikt d^cntlman’: 
Never speak well of yourself, but leave that to others!” 
neva spi:k wel av ja:'self, bat li:v dcet tu xdaz!” 
WORDS: 
among 
regard 
false 
judge 
owner 
honour 
truth 
EXERCISE A. 
Marshall — Storm's stamps carefully from all sides. 
He picked out three — them, saying that they were —, 
as far as he was able to —. Storm said that the — of 
the shop had told him on his word of — that the stamps 
were not false. Marshall said that the owner of the shop 
would not tell the — if he was able to make money by 
— instead, and that it was the same thing with the — 
522 
The Fiftieth (50th) Chapter. 
owner. “You cannot — such men; you cannot believe 
anything that — of them says,” Marshall told Storm. 
Storm did not understand the shopkeeper’s — for telling 
something which was not —. The owner of the shop 
had great — for people with money. Marshall said 
that he would tell him that he was a young man of —. 
The plan seemed — to Storm, but he asked Marshall 
if he thought he could — his part of it. When Mar¬ 
shall came out of the shop, he had to have a good — 
at what had happened. Marshall had told the shop¬ 
keeper that he had returned from —, where he had been 
hunting —. The — of the owner of the shop showed 
that he felt great — for Marshall, and he said he would 
think it a — to help him. Marshall told him about 
his — in India. He had visited the — of a famous 
prince. The more foolish — he performed, the more 
the owner of the shop seemed to — and respect him. 
At home he was hardly — of his own house, Marshall 
had said. The owner of the shop was not a man with 
common —. As it was Saturday afternoon, Marshall 
and Storm were just in the — for doing something else, 
and not for going home. A — told Storm and Marshall 
that there would be no trains for the next two hours. 
A lot of — had to take away a smashed carriage. 
Storm’s clothes did not — him any longer. Men are 
called the stronger —, while women are called the — 
sex. Storm said that he did not like — collars. 
EXERCISE B. 
Answer these questions with full sentences: 
In or near what town do you live? ... Has any interesting 
lie 
former 
trust 
either 
rhotive 
correct 
respect 
respect (verb) 
property 
perfect 
perform 
humour 
laugh 
India 
lion 
behaviour 
privilege 
life 
court 
act 
admire 
master 
sense 
railwayman 
worker 
fit 
sex 
weak 
weaker sex 
stiff 
collar 
523 
Chapter Fifty (50). 
event in the history of your country taken place there, or 
has any famous person lived there? ... Does the town 
do anything to tell tourists about this? ... What is the 
most important industry or trade in your part of the 
country? ... Are you connected with it in any way? ... 
What do you like best about your town? ... Is there 
anything you do not like so well there? ... Would you 
want any important things in the town to be different 
if you had the authority to decide what was to be 
done? ... 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
The words who, whom, whose, which, what, are used 
to ask questions. When used in this way, they are 
called interrogative [inta'rocjativ j pronouns. Here are 
some examples: Who is this man? Whom did you visit? 
Whose book is this? Which of the children is the 
youngest? What are you looking for? 
Who, whom, whose, are only used about persons, as 
may be seen from the examples given. 
What before a noun is used about both things and 
persons. Examples: What meat is this? What man 
would do that? Without a noun following, what is 
used about things only: What do you want? 
Which is used about both persons and things when it 
is followed by ‘of’ and a noun. Examples: Which of 
the days of the week is the first? Which of the girls 
has told you this story? Even if you leave out ‘of’ 
and the noun, you must use which if you ask about 
524 
The Fiftieth (50th) Chapter. 
one or more out of a limited number of persons or 
things. If, for instance, you speak to a person about 
some books that you have both read, you may ask: 
“Which do you like best?” You need not say “Which 
of these books do you like best?”, because the person 
whom you are asking knows what books you are 
speaking of. Here are some more examples where 
you may use which without ‘of’ and a noun. Instead 
of saying “Which of the chairs do you prefer to sit 
in?”, you may say “Which chair do you prefer to sit 
in?” Instead of “Which of the boys did you give the 
money?”, you may ask “Which boy did you give the 
money?” 
Questions: 
Which of the interrogative pronouns are used about 
persons? ... Which of the interrogative pronouns are 
used about things? ... When is ‘which’ used? ... Which 
of the interrogative pronouns are the same words as 
some of the relative pronouns? ... 
Chapter Fifty-One (51). 
The Fifty-First (51st) Chapter. 
A LONDON FOG 
It is often said that as soon as two Englishmen have 
it iz a:fn sed bat dz sum dz tu: iyglifman hav 
been introduced to each other and have said, “How 
bi:n intra'dju:st tu i:tf Ada and hav sed, “'hau- 
do you do!” they always begin to talk about the 
dju'du:!” dei a:lwaz bi'gin ta ta:k a'baut da 
weather. This is not because the Englishman cannot 
weba. bis iz not bi'kaz bi iyglifman kcenat 
find any other subject to discuss, but because he wants 
faind eni \ba SAbdykt ta dis'kAS, bat bi'kaz hi: wants 
to get an impression of the person he is talking to, 
ta get an im'prefan av da pa:sn hi: iz ta:kiy tu, 
before he starts discussing other subjects. And with- 
bi'fa: hi: sta:ts dis'kAsiy Aba SAbdykts. and wib- 
out doubt the weather is a good subject for discussion, 
'aut daut da webar iz a gud SAbdykt fa dis'kAfan, 
because there is so much that can be said about it. 
bi'kaz bear iz sou mAtj bat kan bi: sed a'baut it. 
Many people, for example, are surprised, upon coming 
meni pi:pi, far ig'zamtpl, a: sa'praizd, a'pan kAmiy 
to London, to find that the sun shines at all. They 
ta lAndan, ta faind bat ba SAn fainz at a:l. bei 
expect to find either fog or rain. They have heard 
iks'pekt ta faind aiba fag a rein. bei hav ha:d 
526 
The Fifty-First (51st) Chapter. 
so much about the London fog that they are of the 
sou niAtj a'bcut da lAndan fag dat dei a:r av di 
opinion that without a fog London is not London. And 
a 1 pin j an dat wid'aut a fag l And an iz nat l And an. and 
Storm had been of the same opinion. But in London 
sta:n i had bi:n av da seim a 1 pin fan. hat in l And an 
he was told that there would be no fog before the 
hi: waz tould dat dr a wad hi: nou fag bi'fa: di 
autumn. When October came, it happened almost daily 
a:tarn. hwen ak'touha keim, it hcepnd a:lmoust deili 
that he asked Marshall, “What about that fog? Do 
dat hi: a:skt ma.fal, u hwat a'baut dcet fag? du: 
you think I’ll ever see a fog while staying here?” As 
ju: piyk ail eva si: a fag hwail steiiy hia?” az 
a rule Marshall did not answer that question, but one 
a ru:l ma.fal did fiat a:nsa dcet kwestfan, bat wah 
morning at seven o’clock he stood, already dressed, at 
ma:niy at sevn a'klak hi: stud, a:l'redi drest, at 
the side of Storm’s bed saying, “Now get up, young 
da said av sta:mz bed seiiy, <( nau get Ap, /a y 
man! As far as I remember it’s you who have such 
mean! az fa:r az ax rVmemba its ju: hu: hcev SAtf 
great belief in getting up early in the morning.” “Yes, 
greit bi'li:f in getiy Ap a:li in da ma:niy” “jes, 
that is so, only my belief isn’t quite so strong when 
dcet iz sou, ounli mai bi'li:f iznt kwait sou stray hwen 
it’s seven o’clock in the morning and I’m still in bed,” 
its sevn a'klak in da ma:niy and aim stil in bed,” 
daily = every day 
have belief in = 
believe in 
527 
Chapter Fifty-One (51). 
Storm said sleepily. “Sorry to have called you at this 
sta:m sed sli:pili. “sori ta hav ka:ld ju: at dis 
early hour, but you’ll no doubt thank me for it and 
a:li * aua, bat ju:l non daut fcerjk mi: far it and 
get out of bed quickly when I tell you that to-day at 
get out av bed kwikli hwen cti tel ju: dat ta'dei at 
normal = usual last we’ve got our normal autumn weather. There’s 
la:st wi:v gat ana na:nial a:tain weda. das 
a thick fog outside, and as far as I can see from our 
a pik fag 'aut'said, and as fa:r as ai ban si: fram ana 
windows, it’s even unusually thick.” 
windous, its i:van An'ju:^uali pik. 3> 
Storm at once jumped out of bed. “What? A fog? 
sta:m at w\ns d^Ampt aut av bed. “hwat? a fagf 
You don’t say so!” He ran to the window to see for 
ju: dount sex sou !" hi: rcen ta da zvindou ta si: fa 
himself and then turned to Marshall, saying, “You’re 
him'self and den ta:nd ta ma:fal, seiiij, (C jua 
quite right! Well, the London fog does exist, then.” 
kwait rait! wel, da l And an fag dAS ig'sist, den” 
Marshall: “Yes, in fact it has come about a month 
ma:fal: Ci jes, in fcekt it has kAin a'baut a mAnp 
earlier than usual, and, of course, we are not very 
a:lva dan ju:^ual, and, av ka:s, wi: a: nat veri 
pleased. Normally fogs come in November.” 
pli.sd. na:mali fags kAin in nouvemba” 
An hour later Storm was sitting with the Marshalls 
an ana leita sta:m was sitiy wid da n\a:jals 
528 
The Fifty-First (51st) Chapter. 
round the breakfast table. The light in the room was 
raund da brekfast teibl. da lait in da ru:m was 
on, because it was as dark as night outside. Storm: 
an, bi'kas it was as da:k as nait 'aut'said. sta:m: 
“How dark it is — so late in the morning! It ought 
“hau da:k it is — son leit in da ma:niy! it o:t 
to be light at this time of the day.” Mrs. Marshall: 
ta bi: lait at dis taim av da dei” misis ma:fal: 
“Yes, it’s extremely dark, but the fog is really quite 
“jes, its iks'tri:mli da:k, bat da fag is ridli kwait 
unusually thick.” Mr. Marshall: “I am glad to say 
a n'ju:$uali pik . 33 mista ma:jal: “ai am glced ta sei 
that as a rule it’s not so thick. Sometimes there’s a 
dat as a ru:l its nat sou pik. sxmtaims das a 
mist early in the morning. A mist is not so thick as 
mist a:li in da ma:nhj. a mist is nat sou pik as 
mist = thin fog 
a fog. You will also find mists and fogs in the country. 
a fag. ju: mil a.lsou faind mists and fags in da kAntri. 
The mist is white and clean. This cannot always be 
da mist is hwait and klirn. dis kcenat a:lwas bi: 
said of the fog, which may be extremely dirty in towns 
sed av da fag, hwitf mei bi: iks'tri:mli da:ti in tauhs 
with many factories. While discussing the subject of 
wid meni fcektaris. hwail dis'kAsiy da SAbdykt av 
fog and mist, I ...” “I’m afraid that Storm and I must 
fag and mist, ai.. ” {C aim a'freid dat sta:m and ai mast 
leave now,” Marshall interrupted his father. “It will 
li:v nan , 33 ma:fal inta'rAptid his fa:da. (( it wil 
529 
Chapter Fifty-One (51). 
take us more time to reach the office to-day on account 
teik aj mo: taim to ,ri:tf di of is ta'dei on a'kaunt 
of the fog.” “All right, my boy, but you interrupted 
dv da fog” “o:l rait, mai boi, bat ju: inta'rAptid 
me in telling a little story. You shall have it before 
mi: in teliy a litl sto.ri. ju: fal hav it bi'fo: 
you leave.” Marshall: “Well, who hasn’t got time to 
ju: li:v” ma:fal: “zvel, hit: haznt got taim ta 
dad = father listen to a good story? Go on, dad!” 
lisn tu a gud sto:ri? gou on , dad!” 
Mr. Marshall: “A man that was very drunk, having 
mist a ma:jal: “a man dat zvaz veri dr\yk, haviy 
spent the whole evening drinking beer, called a taxi to 
spent da houl i:vniy driykiy bid, ko:ld a taksi ta 
take him home. There was a thick fog, and the taxi 
teik him houm . dea zvaz a pik fog, and da taksi 
driver said that he couldn’t possibly find his way to 
draiva sed dat hi: kudnt posabli faind hiz zvei ta 
the suburb in which the man lived. However, the man 
da s\ba:b in hzvitf da man livd. hau x eva, da man 
offered him a pound if he would try; but the driver 
of ad him a paund if hi: zvad trai; bat da draiva 
would not accept the offer. The man, who was so 
zvad not ak'sept di of a. da man, hu: zvaz sou 
drunk that he was quite unable to get on a bus or a 
drAyk dat hi: zvaz kzvait 'An'eibl ta get on a bAs o:r a 
tram, increased his offer to five pounds. The driver 
tram, in'kri:st hiz of a ta faiv paundz . da draivar 
530 
The Fifty-First (51st) Chapter. 
at last agreed to take him, but said that he must first 
at la:st d'gri:d td teik him, bat sed ddt hi: mast fa:st 
go upstairs for his brother. ‘What do you want your 
gou Apsteas fa hie hr Ada. c hwat du: ju: want ja: 
brother for?’ asked the man. ‘I need a light in front 
hr Ada fa:? y a:skt da man. € ai ni:d a lait in frAtit 
of the taxi/ the driver answered. ‘Oh, you don't have 
dv da taksi y da droivar a.nsad. t ou, ju: dount hcev 
to go and get your brother; I can walk in front with 
ta gou and get ya: hr Ado: ui kan iva.k in fr.xnt wid 
the light myself/ said the man.” 
da lait maPsclf* sed da man.” 
A few minutes later Storm and Marshall were walking 
a fju: mi nits lei to sta:m and ma:fal wa: wa:khj 
towards the Underground station. They could hear 
ta'wo:ds di And aground stcifan. dei had hi a 
different sounds in the middle of the road, but, with 
difrant sounds in do midi ov da roitd, hAt, wid 
the exception of a girl on a bicycle, they could see 
di ik'sepjan ov a go:l an o boisikl, del kad si: 
nothing. A second or two later they could hear the 
nApiy. a sekond a tu: leita dei kad hia da 
sound of a bus moving in the same direction as the 
sound av a 1)as mir.viy in da seim di'rekfan as da 
girl. Suddenly there was a loud noise, and they heard 
ga:l. sAdnli dea was a loud nais, and dei ha:d 
the sound of the bus stopping, and, at the same time, 
da sound av da b.\s stapiy, and, at da seim taim. 
towards = in the 
direction of 
531 
Chapter Fifty-One (51). 
spot = place 
It hurts, it hurt, 
it has hurt 
[halts, ha:t, halt]. 
natural = normal 
the voice of a girl crying for help. They ran to the 
da vais av a ga:l kraiiy fa help. dei rcen ta da 
spot as fast as they could and found the girl lying in 
spat az fa:st az dei kud and found da ga:l laiiy in 
front of the bus, while the bus-driver was getting 
frAnt av da 1)as, hwail da b.xsdraiva waz getiy 
down. The bicycle had been smashed. They could 
daun. da haisikl had bi:n since ft. dei kad 
see that the girl was hurt, for her left knee was wet 
si: dat da ga:l waz ha:t, fa ha: left ni: waz wet 
with blood, which was beginning to run down her 
wid bUd, hwitf waz biginhj ta vau daun ha: 
stocking, making it quite red. “She's very pale, and 
stakiy, meikiy it kwait red. <( fi:z veri peil , and 
as far as I can see, her knee is rather badly hurt,” 
az fa:r az ai kan si:, ha: ni: iz ra:da bcedli ha:t” 
Marshall said to Storm in a low voice. They both 
ma:jal sect ta sta:m in a l on vais. dei boup 
noticed that the natural colour had gone from the girl’s 
noutist dat da ncetjaral kAla had gan frani da ga:lz 
face. “Something must be the matter with her head, 
feis. u SAmpiy mast bi: da meet a wid ha: hed, 
too, for she’s holding her hand to it as if in pain,” 
tic, fa ji:z houldiy ha: hcend tu it az if in pein,” 
Storm said. Marshall now helped the bus-driver to 
sta: m scd. ma:fal nan helpt da bAsdraiva ta 
lift the girl up from the ground, and then he asked 
lift da ga:l a p frani da ground, and den hi: a:skt 
532 
The Fifty-First (51st) Chapter. 
her, “Are you in much pain?” at the same time trying 
ha:, “a: ju: in niAtf pcin?” at da seim taim traiiy 
to stop the blood running down from her knee by tying 
ta stop da bl\d rAniy daun fram ha: ni: bai taiiy 
his handkerchief round her leg. She was doing her 
hiz hceykatfif round ha: leg. ji: waz du.iy ha: 
best to be brave, for she smiled and said in an almost 
best ta hi: breiv, fa fi: smaild and sed in an o:lmoust 
natural voice, “Well, the pain in my head is bad enough; 
ncrtjaral vois, “zvel, da pein in mai hed iz bced fn\f; 
but I shall be glad if it is no worse than that. The bad, worse, worst 
bat ai jal hi: glced if it iz nou wa:s dan dcet. da 
worst thing about it, I think, is that my leg is hurt; I 
wa:st piy a'bout it, ai piyk, iz dat mai leg iz ha:t; ai 
can’t very well walk on it without help.” “Then my 
ka:nt vcri zvel zvo:k on it zvid'aut help” (( den mai 
friend and I will walk with you or take you in a taxi 
frend and ai zvil zvo:k zvid ju: o: teik ju: in a tceksi 
to the nearest doctor and have him look at your knee,” 
ta da niarist dokta and hcev him luk at jo: ni:,” 
Marshall said. “Oh, thank you so much. But it’s 
rna:fal sed. “on, pceyk ju: sou niAtf. bat its 
not necessary to go in a taxi. My own doctor lives 
not nesisari ta gou in a tceksi. mai oun dokta livz 
quite near, and with your help I can easily walk the 
kzvait nia, and zvid jo: help ai kan i:zili zvo:k da 
few steps to his house.” Bus-driver: “I think we had 
fju: steps ta hiz haus.” bAsdraiva: “ai piyk wi: had 
533 
Chapter Fifty-One (51). 
policeman 
better have a policeman look into what has happened, 
held hcev s pa'li:sman luk intd hwat hd2 heepnd, 
too.” Storm: “Then I’ll try to get one, instead of 
tu:” sta:m: “den ail trai ta get w\n , in'sted av 
going with my friend and the young lady.” 
gouiy zvid mai frend and da jAy leidi” 
Marshall and the girl now left, and Storm went for a 
ma:jal and da ga:l nau left, and sta:m went far a 
policeman. And he had only walked five or six steps 
pa'li:sman. and hi: had ounli wa:kt faiv a siks steps 
when suddenly one appeared. Storm told him what 
hwen s\dnli WAn a'piad. sta:m tould him hwot 
he knew about the accident, pointing towards the spot 
hi: nju: a'baut di ceksidant, paintiy ta'wa:dz da spat 
where it had happened. The policeman wrote it all 
hwear it had heepnd. da pa'li'.sman rout it a:l 
down, after which he asked the bus-driver, “How did 
daun, a:fta hwitf hi: a:skt da bAsdraiva, “hau did 
the accident happen?” Bus-driver: “All I can tell 
di ceksidant hcepn?” bAsdraiva: “a:l ai kan tel 
you is that suddenly I saw a girl on a bicycle crossing 
ju: iz dat SAdnli ai sa: a ga:l an a baisikl krasiy 
the street in front of the bus. Before I could stop, 
da stri:t in frAnt av da bAs. bi'fa.r ai kad stap, 
pushed over = the accident had happened. She was pushed over by 
she^feU down^ ^ ceksidant had heepnd. fi: waz puft ouva bai 
the bus, but wasn’t run over, and that, I think, was 
da bAS, bat waznt rAn ouva, and deet, ai piyk, waz 
534 
The Fifty-First (51st) Chapter. 
the only reason why she escaped death.” 
di ounli ri:zn hwai fi: is'keipt dep” 
Policeman: 
pd'liisnidn: 
death = the end 
of life 
“Judging from what you and this young gentleman 
“d^Adyy frdm hwat ju: end dis jAtj d^entlman 
have explained, her life must have been in great 
hav iks'pleind, ha: laif mast hav bi:n in greit 
danger. I wonder if she knew that death was waiting 
deind^a. ai iVAndar if fi: nju: dat dep was weitiy 
just round the corner, so to speak. It seems as if the 
d$Ast raund da ka:na, sou ta spi:k. it si:ms as if da 
young lady must have been thinking of anything but 
jAtj leidi mast hav bi:n piykiy av enipiy bat 
buses coming from behind, when she was crossing the 
bAsis kAiniy fram bi'haind, hwen fi: was krosiy da 
street. But we’ll have to talk to her about all this 
stri:t. bat wi:l hcev ta ta:k ta ha:r a'baut o:l dis 
later in the day or to-morrow.” 
leitar in da dei a: ta'marou” 
The bus-driver now started his bus again, and the 
da bAsdraiva nan sta:tid his bAS a'gein, and da 
policeman, having noticed that Storm was a foreigner, 
pa'li:snian, hceviy noutist dat sta:m was a farina, 
explained in a professional voice, “People ought to 
iks'pleind in a pra'fefanal vais, “pi: pi a:t ta 
know that in a fog like this they’re in danger of being 
nou dat in a fag laik dis dear in deind^ar av bi:iy 
run down every time they cross the street. We have 
rAn daun evri taim dei kras da stri:t. wi: hav 
535 
Chapter Fifty-One (51). 
many bad accidents of different kinds at this time of 
meni bad aksidants av difrant kaindz at dis taim av 
the year. Last autumn, I remember, two buses ran 
da jid. la:st o:tam, ai ri'memba, tu: bAsiz ran 
into each other. Twenty-five people were hurt, five 
intu i:tf Add. twenti'faiv pi:pi wa: ha:t, faiv 
of them so seriously that they did not live, but died 
dv dam sou siariasli dat dei did not liv, bat daid 
before they had reached the hospital. Besides, a fire 
bi'fo: dei had ri:tft da hospitl. bisaidz, a fata 
started in one of the buses so quickly that the driver 
sta:tid in wau av da bAsiz sou kwikli dat da draiva 
It barns, it burnt, had no time to get out and was burnt up together with 
it has burnt 
[ba:ns,b9:nt,ba:nt]. had nou taim ta get aut and waz ba:nt Ap ta'geda wid 
the bus. Not a very pleasant way of meeting one’s 
da bAS. not a veri pleznt wei av mi:tiy WAnz 
death, I must say. Another bad accident ...” Storm, 
dep, ai mast sei. a'nAda bad aksidant ...” sto:m, 
who had heard enough of accidents and death, inter- 
hu: had ha:d i } nAf av aksidants and dep, inta- 
rupted, “I’m sorry, but I have to leave now to be in 
'rAptid, (t aim sori, bat ai hav ta li:v nau ta bi: in 
time for my work. Good morning!” And then he 
taim fa mai wa:k. gud mo:nirj!” and den hi: 
hurried to the nearest Underground station. 
h\rid ta da niarist Andagraund steifan. 
While Storm had been talking to the policeman, Mar- 
hwail sto:m had bi:n to:kiy ta da pa'li:sman, ma:- 
536 
The Fifty-First (51st) Chapter. 
shall and the girl had arrived at the doctor’s and had 
jal and da ga:l had a'raivd dt dd doktaz and had 
told him what had happened. “Well, let’s have a look 
tould him hwot had hcepnd. “wel, lets h<ev a luk 
at your knee,” the doctor said, taking away the handker- 
at jo: ni:” da dokta sed, teikiy a'wei da hceyka- 
chief. “I must say it is worse than I thought when 
tfif. “ai mast sei it is wa:s dan ai po:t hwen 
I saw you enter the room.” “The pain in it is much 
ai so: ju: enta da ru:m” “da pein in it is mAtf 
worse now than just after the fall. I hope it isn’t 
wa:s nau dan d$\st a:fta da fo:l. ai houp it isnt 
so badly hurt that an operation will be necessary.” 
sou bcedli ha:t dat an opa'reijan wil bi: nesisari” 
“No, you need not be afraid of that. There’s no 
“nou , ju: ni:d not bi: a'freid av dcet. das nou 
reason to use a knife on it. As to the pain, it’s the 
ri:zn ta ju:s a naif on it . cez ta da pein, its di 
effect of the fall, and it’s always worse when some time 
i'fekt av da fo:l, and its o:lwaz wa:s hwen SAm taim 
has passed. But even if it’s bad, you may be glad that 
has pa:st. bat i:van if its bced, ju: mei bi: glced dat 
no operation is necessary. An operation on the knee 
nou opa'reijan iz nesisari. an opa'reijan on da ni: 
is a very difficult thing and sometimes of no effect at 
iz a veri difikalt piy and SAmtaimz av nou i'fekt at 
all. If the worst comes to the worst, the knee becomes 
o:l. if da wa:st kAmz ta da wa:st, da ni: bi'kAmz 
537 
Chapter Fifty-One (51). 
stiff in such cases. But I’ll give you something which 
stif in SAtj keisiz. bat ail giv ju: SAmpiy hwitf 
will take the pain away very quickly.” And indeed, 
wil teik da pein a'wei veri kwikli” and in'di:d, 
what the doctor gave her had a very rapid effect, for 
hwot da dokta geiv ha: heed a veri rcepid i'fekt, far 
in a few minutes the girl felt no pain at all. 
in a fju: minits da ga:l felt nou pein at o:l. 
Doctor: “Now take a taxi home and go to bed. Til 
dokta: “mu teik a tceksi houm and gou ta bed. ail 
come to-morrow and see how you are.” The girl: 
kArn ta'morou and si: hau ju: a:” da ga:l: 
“Won’t that be too much trouble to take for such a 
“wount deet bi: tu: mAtf trAbl ta teik fa SAtf a 
small matter as my bad knee?” Doctor: “Not at all! 
smo:l mcetar az mai bced ni:?” dokta: “not at o:l! 
I’m paying daily visits to a young man not far from 
aim peiitj deili vizits tu a Jaij mcen not fa: from 
where you live.”. 
hwea ju: liv” 
When Marshall had got a taxi for the girl and taken 
hwen ma:fal had got a tceksi fa da ga:l and teikn 
leave of her, he started for the office by bus. When 
li:v av ha:, hi: sta:tid fa di of is bai bAS. hwen 
he got off again, he suddenly saw Storm walking in 
hi: got o:f a'gein, hi: SAdnli so: sto:m wo:kiy in 
front of him. They walked together the rest of the 
frAnt av him. dei ivo:kt ta'geda da rest av da 
538 
The Fifty-First (51st) Chapter. 
way to the office, telling each other what had happened 
wei to di of is, telirj i:tj Ado hwot had hoepnd 
since they left the place of the accident. Marshall 
sins dei left dd pleis dv di ceksiddnt. ma:fel 
noticed that Storm used his handkerchief very often. 
noutist ddt sto:m ju:zd hiz hcetjketfif veri o:fn. 
“You seem to have got a rather bad cold.” Storm: 
“ju: si:m td hdv got d ra:de bced kould” sto:m: 
“Yes, I got it last night, because I didn’t put on my 
“jes, ai got it la:st nait, bikoz ai didnt put on mai 
coat when I went out for a walk. And the fog today 
kout hwen ai went aut fdr d wo:k. dnd dd fog te x dei 
has had a bad effect on my lungs and throat. Since 
hdz hoed o bced i'fekt on mai Iayjz dnd prout. sins 
you left me, I’ve been sneezing on account of the dirty 
ju: left mi:, aiv bi:n sni:zitj on e'kaunt ov dd dd:ti 
air passing through my nose, and I’ve been coughing, 
€d pa: sir) pru: mai nouz, dnd aiv bi:n kofitj, 
too, because of the fog that has got into my mouth 
tu:, bi'koz dv dd fog ddt hdz got into mai maup 
and my throat. It’s extremely unpleasant to know that 
ond mai prout. its iks l tri:mli An x pleznt to nou dot 
every time you take a breath, your lungs get filled with 
evri taim ju: teik o brep, jo: Iaijz get fild wid 
dirty yellow fog. I shall be glad when this fog lifts 
do :ti jelou fog. ai fel bi: glced hwen dis fog lifts 
so that I can once more take a breath of real fresh 
sou dot ai ken WAns mo: teik e brep ov riel fref 
539 
Chapter Fifty-One (51). 
air.” Marshall: “We’re used to it ourselves, but it’s only 
ea” ma:jal: “wid ju:st tu it aua'selvz, bdt its ounli 
natural that you should find it very unpleasant. I’m 
natjaral ddt ju: fad faind it veri An'pleznt. aim 
extremely sorry that your cold is so bad that you must 
iks'tri:mli sari ddt jo: kould iz sou bad ddt ju: mast 
spend most of your time with your handkerchief to 
spend moust av jo: taim wid- jo: haykatjif ta 
your face, sneezing or coughing.” 
jo: feis, sni:ziy o: kofiy” 
Storm: “So am I, but I hope it’ll soon be over. — This 
sto:m: <( sou am ai, bat ai houp itl su:n bi: ouva. — dis 
accident that happened to the girl makes me think of 
aksidant dat hapnd ta da ga:l meiks mi: piyk av 
another accident because of bad weather. It was one 
a'nAdar aksidant bi'koz av bad weda. it waz wah 
evening this summer when Mr. Miller, my friends, and 
i.vniy dis SAma hwen mist a mila, mai jrendz, and 
I were returning from a trip into the country. The 
ai wa: ri'ta:niy fram a trip inta da kAntri. da 
wind began to blow and the rain to fall, and there 
wind bigan ta blou and da rein ta fo:l, and dea 
was a real storm. When the storm had lasted for some 
waz a rial sto:m. hwen da sto:m had la:stid fa SAm 
minutes, lightning was seen again and again, each time 
minits, laitniy waz si:n a'gein and a'gein, i:tf taim 
making the sky as bright as day. At the same time 
meikiy da skai az brait az dei. at da seim taim 
540 
The Fifty-First (Slst) Chapter. 
the sound of thunder came nearer and nearer, and at 
da saund av pAnda keim niara and niara, and at 
last it was so loud that we could hardly hear ourselves 
la:st it was sou laud dat wi: kad Jw:dli hiar aua'selvz 
speaking. We hurried to the nearest farmhouse and 
spi:kiy. wi: h\rid ta da niarist fa:mhaus and 
stayed there as long as the thunderstorm lasted. The 
steid dea as by as da pAndasto:m la:stid. da 
people at the farm got very nervous when they saw 
pi:pl dt da fa:m got veri na:vas hwen dei so: 
the lightning and heard the thunder, because their maid 
da laitniy and ha:d da pAnda, bi'kas dea meid 
was out in it. It was not without reason that they 
was aut in it. it waz not wid'aut ri:sn dat dei 
were nervous, for when the thunderstorm had passed, 
wa: na:vas, fa hwen da pAndasta:m had pa:st, 
she was found in a field, struck by lightning and badly 
fi: was faund in a fi:ld, strAk bai laitnirj and bccdli 
burnt. I’m glad to say that she didn’t die, but she had 
ba:nt. aim glced ta sei dat fi: didnt dai, bat fi: heed 
to stay in bed for several months. Only the other day 
ta stci in bed fa sevral uiAnps. ounli di Ada dei 
I heard that she’s all right again now.” 
ai ha:d dat ji:s a:l rait a'gein nau” 
EXERCISE A. 
The weather is a — which is very often discussed. Storm 
had great — in getting up early in the morning. Fog 
WORDS: 
subject 
541 
Chapter Fifty-One (51). 
belief 
normal 
burn 
burnt 
mist 
interrupt 
drunk 
towards 
sound 
spot 
knee 
hurt 
blood 
natural 
pain 
worse 
worst 
doctor 
policeman 
accident 
danger 
death 
die 
died 
operation 
effect 
belongs to the — autumn weather in London. The light 
in the dining-room was on as it was as — as night 
outside. Thin fog is called —. In towns with many 
factories the fog may be — dirty. Marshall — his 
father in telling a story about a man who was very —, 
because he had got too much to drink. When Marshall 
and Storm walked — the Underground station, they 
heard the — of a bus stopping. They ran to the — and 
found a girl whose left — was badly —. The — was 
beginning to run down her stocking. The colour of her 
face did not look —. The — in her knee was — than 
that in her head. Marshall went with the girl to the 
—, while Storm went for a — to tell him about the —. 
The girl’s life had been in great —. The end of life 
is called —. When you cannot live any longer, you —. 
An — on the knee is very unpleasant and sometimes of 
no —. The pain in the girl’s knee was an effect of the 
—. The doctor paid — visits to a young jnan near the 
girl’s home. Every time Storm took a —, he got his 
lungs and — filled with fog. On account of a bad cold 
he had been coughing and — the whole morning. When 
the wind blows hard and the rain falls heavily, it is 
fall 
breath 
throat 
sneeze 
cough 
storm 
lightning 
thunderstorm 
thunder 
dad 
called a —. — is seen in the sky during a —. When 
lightning is seen in the sky, you often hear —. Storm 
told Marshall about a maid who had been struck by 
lightning and badly —. 
EXERCISE B. 
In chapter 48, Exercise D, there was a letter from Storm 
to Wood. Please answer this letter as if you were Wood. 
542 
The Fifty-First (51st) Chapter 
Build a story round some event that Wood wants to 
tell Storm about, and make use of the following words: 
Trip — country — storm — lightning — rain — tree — 
wet — cart — farmer — cough — sneeze — extremely 
— unpleasant. 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
There are some words which we call the indefinite 
pronouns. They are words like no, none, some, any, 
every, each. 
No is used as an adjective. Example: I have no money. 
If we want to use it as a noun, we do not say no, but 
none. Example: I have money, but you have none. 
When used as a noun about persons, no becomes nobody 
or no one, and when used about things it often becomes 
nothing. Examples: Nobody (no one) was at home. 
There was nothing I could do for him. Just the same 
is the case with the pronouns some, any, every. When 
used as nouns about persons, they have the forms some¬ 
body (some one), anybody (any one), everybody (every 
one), and when used as nouns about things their forms 
are something, anything, everything. 
There is a difference in the use of any and some, 
although the two words mean almost the same thing. 
Any (anything, anybody) is especially found after ‘if’ 
and ‘whether*, in questions, and in sentences with ‘not*. 
Some (somebody, something) is used in other sentences. 
Here are some examples: If I had any cigars, I would 
543 
Chapter Fifty-One (51). 
give you some of them. Has anybody been here? If 
anybody has been here, tell me. She has not been able 
to find anything. Have you got any money? No, I 
have not got any money; have you? Yes, I have got 
some money. 
Each is used to say something about every one of a 
number of persons or things. Every is used to say some¬ 
thing about all of a number of persons or things. Ex¬ 
amples: He read a new book each day of the week he 
stayed at our house. He goes to school every day. Each 
of the three sisters got a new frock for Christmas. 
Everybody has to learn to read and write. 
Questions: 
What indefinite pronouns do you know? ... When do 
we use ‘no 5 , and when do we use ‘none 5 ? ... What two 
words are added to some of the indefinite pronouns 
when they are used as nouns about persons? ... What 
is added when they are used about things? ... In what 
kinds of sentences do we use the word ‘any 5 ? ... Can 
you give two examples of the use of ‘some’ and ‘any 5 ? 
... In what case is the indefinite pronoun ‘each’ used? 
... Can you make two sentences where the pronouns 
‘each’ and ‘every 5 are used in the right way? ... 
544 
Chapter Fifty-Two (52). 
The Fifty-Second (52nd) Chapter. 
ENGLISH HOLIDAYS 
“It's been a long day to-day,” Storm said, as he and 
“its bi:n a lay dei ta'dei” sto:m sed, az hi: and 
Marshall left the office late one evening at the 
ma.fal left di of is leit WAn i:vniy at da 
beginning of December, “and a hard week, too; I'm 
biginiy av dVsemba, “and a ha:d wi:k, tu:; aim 
really feeling quite tired to-night. I wish I could 
riali fi:liy kwait taiad ta'nait. ai wif ai kad 
take a few days off from work. Two or three days' 
teik a fju: deiz o:f fram wa:k. tu: a pri: deiz 
complete rest, with nothing to do but read the papers 
kam x pli:t rest, wid ha piy ta du: bat ri:d da peipaz 
and go for a walk now and then, is just what I need; 
an gou far a wa:k nau an den, iz d^ASt hwot ai ni:d; 
my head feels quite empty. Are there any holidays 
mai hed fi:lz kwait emti. a: dear eni halidiz 
between now and Christmas, I wonder?” “No, there 
bi'twi:n nau an krismas, ai WAnde?” “nou, dear 
aren't any till Christmas,” Marshall replied, “so you'll 
a:nt eni til krismas” ma:fal ri'plaid, “sou ju:l 
have to wait until then. It’s a general rule at the 
hcev ta weit Aritil den. its a d^enaral ru:l at di 
office that nobody asks for days off during December, 
of is dat noubadi a:sks fa deiz o:f djuariy disemba, 
H/l 
545 
Chapter Fifty-Two (52). 
because we’re always so busy during the weeks before 
bi'kaz wiar a:lwaz sou bizi djuariy da wi:ks bi'fa: 
Christmas. But I must say that generally December 
krismas. bat ai mast set dat d^enarali di'sembar 
is not so busy as this year, so I’m looking forward to 
: z not sou bizi az dis jia, sou aim lukirj fa:wad ta 
the Christmas holidays myself. We always have such 
da krismas halidiz mai'self. wi: a:lwaz hcev SAtj 
a good time at Christmas; we make it a family affair, 
a gud taim at krismas; wi: meik it a fcemili a'fea, 
you know. My sister will be there for dinner on 
ju: nou. mai sista wil bi: dea fa dinar an 
Christmas Day, with her husband and her baby. It’s 
krismas dei, wid ha: hAzband an ha: beibi. its 
a very long time since I saw them, and I’m looking 
a veri lay taim sins ai sa: dam, and aim lukiy 
forward to spending some time with them again, and 
fa.wad ta spendiy sam taim wid dam a'gein, an 
to having two whole days off from work.” “Only 
ta hceviy tu: houl deiz a:f fram wa:k” ec ounli 
two?” Storm asked. “In my country we have two 
tu:? 33 sta:m a:skt. “in mai kAntri wi: hcev tu: 
and a half, as all offices and shops generally close 
and a ha:f, az a:l afisiz an faps d^enarali klouz 
about twelve o’clock on the 24th.” “No, we keep 
a l baut twelv a'klak an da twenti'fa:p. 3> “nou, wi: ki:p 
the usual closing hours on the day before Christmas,” 
da ju:$ual klouziy auaz an da dei bi'fa: krismas, 33 
546 
The Fifty-Second (52nd) Chapter. 
Marshall replied. “The shops and streets will be full 
ma:jdl ri'plaid. “da japs an stri:ts wil bi: ful 
of people late in the afternoon. In front of the shop 
dv pi:pl leit in di a:fta'nu:n. in frAnt av da jap 
windows there will be crowds of people looking at the 
windouz dea wil bi: kraudz av pi:pl lukiy at da 
different things shown in the windows. Everybody 
difrant piyz foun in da windouz. evribodi 
will want to see as much as possible, to help them to 
wil want ta si: az mAtf az pasabl, ta help dam ta 
make the difficult last minute decisions about Christmas 
meik da difikalt la:st minit di'si^anz a'baut krismas 
presents for Uncle Fred or Aunt Jane. 
preznts far Atjkl fred a:r a:nt d^ein. 
“There will be children crying because they can’t see 
“dea wil bi: tjildran kraiiy bi'kaz dei ka:nt si: 
anything, and mothers pushing them forward through 
enipiy, an MAdaz pujirj dam fa:wad pru: 
the crowd, so that the little ones may get a chance to 
da kraud, sou dat da litl WAnz mei get a tja.ns ta 
look at the fine things in the windows, too. And 
luk at da fain piyz in da windouz, tu:. and 
everybody will be having a lovely time! I’m sorry 
evribodi wil bi: hceviy a IavU taim! aim sari 
Christmas is over so soon — only two days, Christmas 
krismas iz ouva sou su:n — ounli tu: deiz, krismas 
Day and Boxing Day.” “Boxing Day!' What a 
dei an boksiy dei. 33 “boksiy dei! hwot a 
14/2 
547 
Chapter Fifty-Two (52). 
Christmas box = 
Christmas present 
He rises, he rose, 
he has risen [raiziz, 
rouz, rizn ]. 
object = thing 
strange name!” Storm said. “Yes, but easy to explain,” 
streind 3 neim!” sto:m sed. “jes, bat i:zi tu iks'plein ,” 
Marshall replied. “You see, on the 26th of 
ma:Jal ri plaid. “ju: si:, on da twentisiksp av 
December the postman, the milkman f etc., used to 
di'semba da poustman, da milkman, it'setra, ju:st ta 
come round to all the houses and get their ‘Christmas 
k\m raund tu o:l da hauziz an get dea € krismas 
boxes’. They still come, but nowadays the presents 
boksiz \ dei stil k\m, bat nauadeiz da preznts 
no longer consist of real boxes with things in them, 
nou hyga karisist av rial boksiz wid pirjz in dam, 
but instead they usually consist of a small amount 
bat in'sted dei ju.^uali kan'sist av a smo:l a 1 mount 
of money.” “I see! Yes, that explains it, of course,” 
av m\ni“ai si:! jes, dcet iks x pleinz it, av ko:s,” 
Storm answered. 
sto:m a: ns ad. 
Storm and Marshall had reached their bus now, and 
sto:m and ma:fal had ri:t/t dea b\s nau, and 
as they got on board, two ladies rose from their seats 
az dei got on bo:d, tu: leidiz rouz from dea si:ts 
to get off when the bus stopped next time. One of 
ta get o:f hwen da b\s stopt nekst taim. WAn av 
them dropped her bag when she rose, and all the 
dam dr opt ha: bceg hwen fi: rouz, and o:l da 
different objects in it with which women fill their bags 
difrant obdykts in it wid hwitj wimin fil dea bcegz 
548 
The Fifty-Second (52nd) Chapter. 
fell out on the floor. “Let me help you,” said Storm, 
fel aut an da fh:. “let mi: help jused sta:m, 
and began to pick up keys, coins, and a handkerchief 
and bigoen ta pik Ap ki:z, kainz, and a hay k at f if 
from the floor. “How kind of you! Thank you very 
fram da fla:. “hau kaind av ju:! pceyk ju: veri 
much!” she replied, hurrying after the other lady with 
iHAtf!” ft: ri'plaid, hAriiy a:fta di Ada leidi wid 
her hands full of all sorts of strange objects, which 
ha: hcendz ful av o:l sa:ts av streind 3 abd^ikts, hwitj 
she had no time to put back into the bag. “This is 
fi: had nou taim ta put bcek inta da bceg. “dis iz 
almost too good to be true,” Marshall said, as he made 
a:lmoust tu: gud ta bi: tru:,” mcr.jal sed, az hi: meid 
himself comfortable on the seat. “I mean, to be able 
him 1 self kAinfatabl an da si:t. “ai mi:n, ta bi: eibl 
to sit down all the way home in an almost empty bus. 
ta sit daun a:l da wci houm in an a:lmoust eniti bAS. 
The trips to and from the office generally consist of 
da trips tu an fram di afis d^enarali kan'sist av 
long half-hours of standing on my feet — and other 
lay ha.fauaz av stcendiy an mai fi:t — and a da 
people standing on them, too — on my feet, I mean! 
pi:pi stcendiy an dam, tu: — an mat fi:t, ai mi:n! 
And if I do get a seat now and then, some old lady is 
and if ai du: get a si:t nau an den, SAm ould leidi iz 
sure to enter the bus, so that I have to rise and offer 
fua tu enta da bAS, sou dat ai hcev ta raiz and afar 
549 
Chapter Fifty-Two (52). 
it to her.” 
it tu ha :/ 9 
“The perfect gentleman, aren’t you?” Storm said, 
“da pa:fikt d^entlman, a:nt ju:?” sto:m sed, 
smiling. “Talking about gentlemen, I wonder if you 
smailif /. “ta:kirj a'baut d^entlman, ai WAndar if ju: 
can help me to come to a decision,” he continued, 
kan help mi: td kxm tu d di'si^an,” hi: kan l tinju:d, 
pulling a small object out of his pocket. When Storm 
pulitj d sma:l abdykt aut dv hiz pakit. hwen sta:m 
showed it to him, Marshall saw that it was a very 
joud it tu him, ma:jdl so: ddt it waz d veri 
small book of songs, in fine leather with gold letters 
sma:l buk dv sayz, in fain ledd wid gould letaz 
printed on the back. “I bought it some days ago for 
printid an da bcek. “ai ba:t it saiu deiz a'gou fa 
Marion. But then the thought came to me that perhaps 
mcerian. bat den da pa:t keim ta mi: dat pa'hceps 
she would think it foolish of me to give her a thing 
fi: wad pirjk it fu:lif av mi: ta giv ha:r a piy 
like that, and now I can’t come to a decision whether 
laik dcet, an nau ai ka:nt kAm tu a di'si^an hweda 
to give it to her or not. I wouldn’t like to look foolish 
ta giv it tu ha:r a: nat. ai wudnt laik ta luk fu:lif 
in her eyes.” To his surprise, Marshall seemed to think 
in ha:r aiz” ta hiz sa'praiz, ma:fal si:md ta pirjk 
this very funny. “Excuse me, old man, but I must 
dis veri fAni. “iks'kju:z mi:, ould mcen, bat ai mast 
550 
The Fifty-Second (52nd) Chapter. 
laugh when I see your serious face. Of course you 
la:f hwen ai si: jo: sidrids feis. av ko:s ju: 
can give her the book! I’m really beginning to believe 
kan giv ha: da buk! aim riali bi'giniy ta bi'li:v 
it’s true what my mother says, that your head is filled 
its tru: hwot mai m\da sez, dat ja: hed iz fild 
with thoughts of that young lady.” 
wid po:ts av dat ]\rj leidi / 3 
Just then the bus began moving forward quite suddenly, 
d^ASt den da bAS bi'gcen mu:viy fo:zvad kwait SAdnli, 
so that one of the passengers, a lady, who was ascending 
sou dat wau av da pcesind^az, a leidi, hu: waz a'sendirj 
the stairs to the top of the bus, fell down, happily right 
da steaz ta da top av da bAS, fel daun, hcepili rait 
into the arms of one of the other passengers, so that 
inta di a:mz av wah av di Ada pcesind^az, sou dat 
nothing serious happened. Everybody expected her to 
nApirj siarias hcepnd. evribodi iks'pektid ha: ta 
cry out, as women usually do, for the accident had not 
krai aut, az wimin ju.^uali du:, fa di ceksidant had not 
been without real danger. But as soon as she had got 
bi:n mid'aut rial deind^a. bat az su:n az fi: had got 
on her feet again, she said, to everybody’s surprise, 
on ha: fi:t a'gein, fi: sed, tu evribodiz sa'praiz, 
“Oh, excuse me, I’m so sorry! I’m afraid I wasn’t 
“ou, iks'kju:z mi:, aim sou sori! aim a'freid ai woznt 
very careful. But thank God nothing happened to 
veri keaful. bat pcetjk god nApiy hcepnd ta 
passenger = one 
who travels by 
ship, train, car, or 
bus 
ascend = go up 
14 3 
551 
Chapter Fifty-Two (52). 
you!” — and then she rapidly ascended the stairs 
ju: !” — and den fi: rcepidli a'sendid da steaz 
again. 
a'gein. 
“It's men and women like this lady who have helped 
“its men an wimin laik dis leidi hu: hav helpt 
to make our great British Empire, people who can keep 
ta meik aua greit britij empaia, pi:pi hu: kan ki:p 
their heads cool and think of others even in the face 
dea hedz ku:l an piyk av \daz i:van in da feis 
of danger,” Marshall said. “You British and your 
av deind^a” ma:jal sed. “ju: britij an jo:r 
Empire!” Storm replied. “You must indeed be proud 
empaial 33 sta:m ri'plaid. “ju: mast in'di:d bi: praud 
of it, when a little thing like this can call up the 
av it, hwen a litl pig laik dis kan ko:l Ap da 
thought of it. You even have an Empire Day, a sort 
po:t av it. ju: i:van hcev an empaia dei, a so:t 
of state holiday, I’ve read. I don’t know what date 
av steit holidi, aiv red. ai dount nou hwot deit 
it is, though. Is it soon?” he asked. 
it iz, dou. iz it su:n?” hi: a:skt. 
“No, not until the twenty-fourth of May, the birthday 
“nou, not An 1 til da twenti'fo:p av mei, da ba:pdei 
of Queen Victoria. But we British are not so proud 
av kwi:n vik x to:ria. bat wi: britij a: not sou praud 
as you seem to think,” Marshall answered. “You look 
az ju: si:m ta piyk” ma:jal a.nsad . “ju: luk 
552 
The Fifty-Second (52nd) Chapter. 
as if you don’t believe me,” he continued, seeing the 
az if ju: dount bi'li:v mi:,” hi: kdn'tinju:d, si:iy di 
expression on Storm’s face, “but I can almost prove 
iks'prefdn an sta.mz feis, “bdt ai kdn admoust pru:v 
it to you. We don’t even keep our Empire Day as a 
it tu ju:. wi: dount i:vdn ki:p auor empaid dei dz 3 
real national holiday, as they do in France, for instance, 
rial ncefdndl halidi, dz dei du: in fra:ns, far instans, 
with everybody out in the streets, singing and dancing. 
wid evribadi aut in da stri:ts, siyirj an da:nsiy. 
We just send the children home from school after a little 
wi: d$Ast send da tfildran houm fram sku:l a:ftar a litl 
talk in the morning about the British Empire.” “Well, 
ta:k in da ma.niy a'baut da britif empaia” “wel, 
perhaps you aren’t as bad as I thought,” Storm replied. 
pa'haps ju: a:nt az bad az ai pa:t,” storm rtplaid. 
“But tell me, now that we’re talking about holidays — 
{( bat tel mi:, nau dat wia to:kit) a'baut halidiz — 
do you keep the same holidays as we do in my country, 
du: ju: ki:p da seim halidiz az wi: du: in mai kAntri, 
I wonder?” Marshall: “The great Church holidays are 
ai WAndaf” ma:fal: “da greit tfa:tf holidiz a: 
the same, I suppose: Christmas, which the Church tells 
da seim, ai sa'pouz: krismas, hwitj da tfa:tf telz 
us was the time of the birth of Christ, God’s Son. That 
as waz da taim av da ba:p av kraist, gadz SAn. dat 
is to say, there is much discussion between the different 
iz ta sei, daz mAtf dis'kAfan bi'twi:n da difrant 
553 
Chapter Fifty-Two (52). 
religions about the true date of His birth. The Roman 
ri'lidynz a'baut da tru: deit av hiz bd:p. da rouman 
Catholic religion tells us it was at Christmas, and most 
kcepalik ri'lid^an telz as it waz at krismas, an moust 
Protestants do the same, while other Protestants say 
pratistants du: da seim, hwail Ada pratistants sei 
they can prove from the Bible that the birth of Christ 
dei kan pru:v fram da baibl bat da ba:p av kraist 
settle = decide 
man (here) = 
all men 
took place in the autumn. I don’t know whether the 
tuk pleis in di a: tarn. ai dount nou hivedo da 
question has been settled, but I do know that few 
kwestfan haz bi:n setld, bat ai du: nou bat fju: 
people at Christmas think of the account in the Bible 
pi:pl at krismas piyk av di a'kaunt in da baibl 
of how Christ was sent from Heaven to live upon this 
av hau kraist waz sent fram hevn ta liv a'pan bis 
earth of ours and teach people about God and God’s 
a:p av auaz an ti:tf pi:pi a l baut gad an gadz 
plans for man. What they think of for the most part 
plcenz fa mcen. hwat dei piyk av fa da moust pa:t 
grave 
is the good time they’re going to have with their friends 
iz da gud taim dea gouiy ta hcev wid dea frendz 
and family! — Well, after Christmas comes Easter — 
an fcemili! — wel, a:fta krismas kAmz i:sta — 
Good Friday, when Christ died, Easter Sunday, when 
gud fraidi, hwen kraist daid, i:sta SAndi, hwen 
He rose from the grave, and Easter Monday.” “Excuse 
hi: rouz fram da greiv, and i:sta m\ndi” (C iks'kju:z 
554 
The Fifty-Second (52nd) Chapter. 
my interrupting you in the middle of your account,” 
mai inta'rAptin ju: in da midi av p:r a'kaunt, 33 
Storm said, “Good Friday, what a strange name for the 
sto:m sed, “gud fraidi, hwat a streind 3 neim fa da 
day on which Christ died!” “Yes, isn’t it?” “What 
del on hwitj kraist daid! 33 “jes, iznt it? 33 “hwot 
about the New Year?” Storm asked. “You didn’t 
a'baut da nju: jia? 33 sta:m a:skt . “ju: didnt 
mention it.” “There’s nothing much to tell about that,” 
menfan it . 33 “daz nApirj mAtf ta tel a'baut dcet, 33 
Marshall answered. “In Scotland they keep the first 
ma:jal a:nsad. “in skatland dei ki:p da fa:st 
of January, but here shops, offices, etc., are all open. 
av d^cenjuari, bat hia Japs, afisiz, it'setra, a:r a:l oupan. 
At the most, we have a party on the 31st of 
at da moust, wi: hav a pa:ti an da pa:ti l fa:st av 
December and dance into the New Year, or go out into 
di'semba an da:ns inta da nju: jia, a: gou aut inta 
the streets at twelve o’clock and say ‘Happy New Year* 
da stri.ts at twelv a'klak an sei ‘hcepi nju: jia 9 
to complete strangers. Well, shall I continue my 
ta kam'pli:t streind^az. wel, jal ai kan'tinju: mai 
account of our holidays and get it over?” “Yes, please 
a'kaunt av aua halidiz an get it ouvaf 33 “jes, pli:z 
do!” Storm replied. “I might as well use this half-hour 
du:! 33 sta:m ri'plaid, “ai mait az wel ju:z dis ha.faua 
to learn something.” “All right! Seven weeks after 
ta la:n SAmpiy. 33 “a:l rait! sevn wi:ks a.ftar 
555 
Chapter Fifty-Two (52). 
Easter is Whitsun, consisting of Whit Sunday and Whit 
i:std iz hwitsn, kan'sistitj av hwit sAndi an hwit 
Monday.” “I should like to ask you something here,” 
mAndi” “ai fad laik tu a:sk ju: s Amply hia” 
Storm interrupted again. “Don’t you keep the day when 
sto:m inta'rAptid a'gein. “dount ju: ki:p da dei hwen 
Christ ascended to Heaven as a holiday? I didn’t hear 
kraist a'sendid ta hevn az a holidi? ai didnt hia 
you mention it?” “It’s not a general holiday, with the 
ju: menfan it?” “its not a d^enaral holidi, wid da 
shops closed and so on,” Marshall answered, “but we 
fops klouzd an sou on” maifal a:nsad, “bat wi: 
have a name for it, of course, Ascension Day, on which 
hav a neim far it, av ko:s, a 1 senfan dei, on hwitf 
the churches hold special services for Christ’s ascension 
da tfa:tjiz hould spefal sa:visiz fa kraists asenfan 
to Heaven.” 
ta hevn” 
“Well, that is all very much like our holidays at home,” 
“wel, dcet iz o:l veri mAtf laik aua holidiz at houm,” 
Storm said. “Yes, but I’m not through yet — we have 
sto:m sed. “jes, bat aim not pru: jet — mi: hav 
a holiday which I’m sure you haven’t got,” Marshall 
a holidi hwitf aim fua ju: hcevnt got, }> ma:fal 
replied, “and it’s one that we all love and look forward 
rtplaid, “and its WAn dat wi: o:l Iav an luk fo:wad 
to for weeks. It’s called August Bank Holiday, and 
tu fa wi:ks. its ko:ld o:gast bceyk holidi, and 
556 
The Fifty-Second (52nd) Chapter. 
it’s always on the first Monday in August. The weather 
its o:lwaz on da fa:st mAndi in o:gast. da wedar 
is generally fine, and everybody has a lovely time. As a 
iz dynarali fain , and evribodi haz a IavU taim. az a 
boy I often went into the country on that day with 
boi ai o:fn went inta da kAntri on dcet dei wid 
my people, starting as soon as the sun had risen and people (here) = 
mat pi:pl, sta:tiy az su:n az da SAn had rizn an P arent s 
returning in the evening very, very tired and very, 
ri'tarniy in di i:vniy veri, veri taiad an veri, 
very happy. We might as well have gone any other 
veri hcepi. wi: mail az wel hav gon eni Ada 
summer day during the school holidays, but it was 
SAma dei djuariy da sku:l holidiz, bat it waz 
always much more fun on that day, because so many 
o:lwaz niAtj mo: fAn on dcet dei, bi x koz sou meni 
people were out.” “Why is it called ‘Bank Holiday’?” 
pi:pi wa:r aut” te hwai iz it ko:ld c bceyk holidi y ?” 
Storm asked. “That needs a little explaining,” Mar- 
sto:m a:skt. “dcet ni:dz a litl iks'pleiniy,” ma:- 
shall replied. “We have four ‘bank holidays’: Boxing 
jal ri' plaid. “wi: hav fo: ‘bceyk holidiz y : boksiy 
Day — perhaps I should give them in their correct 
dei — pa'hceps ai fad giv dam in dea ka l rekt 
order: Easter Monday, Whit Monday, August Bank order = the way 
o:da : i:sta mAndi, hwit mAndi, o:gast bceyk one thing follows 
* J another 
Holiday, and Boxing Day. The law of the country says 
holidi, an boksiy dei. da lo: av da kAntri sez 
557 
Chapter Fifty-Two (52). 
that on these four days all banks must close, and as 
dat on di:z fo: deiz o:l bceyks most klouz, and oz 
factories, shops, and offices then close, too, those days 
fcektariz, fops, and ofisiz den klouz, tu:, douz deiz 
have become general holidays.” 
hav bik\m dynaral holidiz.” 
“I see,” Storm said. “And I understand what you said 
“ai si:,” sto:m sed. “and ai Anda'stcend hwot ju: sed 
about closing on the three weekdays following religious 
a'baut klouziy on da pri: wi:kdeiz folouiy ri'lid^as 
holidays, but I really find it a funny thought that your 
holidiz, bat di riali faind it a pAni po:t dat jo: 
great British Parliament should have taken the trouble 
greit britij pd.'lamant Jad hav teikn. da trAbl 
to discuss a question like the third holiday and make 
ta dis'kAS a kwestfan Idik da pa:d holidi an meik 
an Act of Parliament about it. But I suppose that if 
an cekt av pd.'lamant a 1 bout it. bat di sa'pouz dat if 
you had time to read through all the Acts of Parliament 
ju: had taim ta ri:d pru: o:l di cekts av pa.lamant 
that make up the laws of the country, you would find 
dat meik Ap da lo:z av da kAntri, ju: wad fdind 
many strange things.” ‘Til tell you what I think,” 
meni streind 3 piyz.” (( dil tel ju: hwot ai piyk,” 
Marshall replied with a smile; “I think that at the end 
md.'Jal ri'plaid wid a small; “di piyk dat at di end 
of an extremely hot week once upon a time, some 
av an iks x tri:mli hot wi:k waus a'pon a taim, SAm 
558 
The Fifty-Second (52nd) Chapter. 
Member of Parliament who perhaps was a bank 
me mb dr dv pa:ldmdnt hu: p o'keeps woz d beeyk 
manager thought to himself, ‘How unpleasant to have 
meenid^o po:t td him'self, K hau An'pleznt td heev 
to work in this heat, and how nice if one could get 
td wd:k in dis hi:t, dn hau nais if wah kdd get 
away from town for an extra day, at least once during 
d'wei frdm taun fdr dn ekstrd dei, dt li:st waus djuoriy 
the summer! One ought to suggest, next time Parlia- 
dd sAiiid! WAti o:t td so'd^est, nekst taim pa:fo¬ 
ment sits, that all banks must close one Monday every 
mdnt sits, ddt o:l beeyks mdst klouz wah MAndi evri 
summer.’ And so he did, and so it became an Act of 
SAiiid . 9 dn sou hi: did, dn sou it bi'keim dn eekt dv 
Parliament, and so everybody was happy, as they say 
pa.'fomdnt, dn sou evribodi wdz heepi, dz dei sei 
in the story-books!” As they rose to get off, Storm 
in dd sto:ribuks!” dz dei rouz td get o:f, sto:m 
said with a laugh, “You would make a great teacher 
sed wid d la:f, “ju: wdd meik d greit ti:tfdr 
of history, I think. If there was something you didn’t 
dv histdri, ai piyk. if dee wdz SAmpiy ju: didnt 
know, you would always be able to make up a fine 
nou , ju: wdd o:lwdz bi: eibl td meik Ap d fain 
story in no time!” 
sto:ri in nou taim!” 
in no time = in a 
very short time 
14 4 
559 
Chapter Fifty-Two (52). 
WORDS: 
general 
generally 
Boxing Day 
milkman 
off 
complete 
object 
decision 
forward 
religion 
settle 
birth 
true 
date 
prove 
account 
Easter Sunday 
Easter Monday 
Easter 
Whit Sunday 
Whit Monday 
Whitsun 
consist 
Good Friday 
ascend 
Ascension 
heaven 
thought 
act 
law 
rise 
rose 
EXERCISE A. 
Storm wanted a few days — from his work; he needed 
two or three days’ — rest, he said. But he would have 
to wait till Christmas for his rest, as it was the — rule 
at the office that nobody asked for days off during 
December. — Day is the day after Christmas Day; 
it is called so, because on that day the —, the postman, 
and others used to come to get their Christmas —. 
In the days before Christmas there are always many 
people in — of the shop windows, looking at the many 
things in the windows so that they may get an idea to 
help them to come to a — about Christmas presents. 
Mothers push their children — through the crowds, so 
that they can see. Everybody is — forward to seeing 
their friends and family during Christmas. In the bus 
home, Storm took a small — from his pocket and 
showed it to Marshall. 
The different — have not been able to — the question 
of when the — of Christ took place; some say it was at 
Christmas, and others say that this is not —, but that 
the true — of His birth is some time in the autumn. 
They say that they can — this from the — of His birth 
in the Bible. 
In England they have four holidays called bank holi¬ 
days: Easter Monday,-,-, and Boxing Day. 
Easter consists of three holidays,-,-, and Easter 
Monday. — is seven weeks after Easter. Ascension 
Day is the day when Christ — to —. 
560 
The Fifty-Second (52nd) Chapter. 
Storm found it a funny — that the great British Parlia¬ 
ment should have taken the trouble to make the decision 
about August Bank Holiday an — of Parliament. All 
the different Acts of Parliament make up the — of the 
country. Marshall told Storm that he — had to stand 
in the bus home, and that if he did get a seat, he very 
often had to — and offer it to a lady. 
risen 
God 
Christ 
excuse 
grave 
Empire Day 
empire 
Bible 
order 
Christmas box 
passenger 
EXERCISE B. 
Answer these questions with full sentences: 
Are there buses where you live? ... What other kinds 
of traffic are there near your home? ... How do you 
get to and from your work? ... Can you explain what 
holidays you keep yourself? ... What Christmas presents 
did you get last Christmas? ... What do you generally 
do during the Christmas holidays? ... Do you take part 
in any winter sports? ... What do children always buy 
at Easter? ... 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
Numerals [n jit: mar els] are words like the following: 
one, four, six, the first, the third, the sixth. There are 
two kinds of numerals, cardinals \ka:dinab] and ordinals 
[j:dinals\. Of the examples mentioned ‘one’, ‘four’, and 
‘six’ are cardinals, and ‘the first’, c the third’, and 
‘the sixth’ are ordinals. 
561 
Chapter Fifty-Two (52). 
Cardinals are used to express the number of persons, 
animals, or things that we are speaking of. Examples: 
I have thirteen shillings in my pocket. Nine men and 
eight women were present. 
Ordinals show the order in which persons, animals, or 
things appear or happen. Examples: March is the third 
month of the year. This is the fifth time I have had 
to close the door. 
Here are lists of cardinals and ordinals. By the help 
of these you will be able to express any numeral in 
English. 
Cardinals 
1 one [wAn] 
2 two [ tu:] 
3 three [pri:] 
4 four [/;?:] 
5 five [ faiv ] 
6 six [ siks] 
7 seven [sevn] 
8 eight [eit] 
9 nine [nain] 
10 ten [ten] 
11 eleven [i'levn] 
12 twelve [twelv] 
13 thirteen ['pd.'ti.n] 
14 fourteen 
15 fifteen ['fifti.n] 
16 sixteen ['siks'ti.n] 
Ordinals 
the first [f 3 :st] 
the second [sekand] 
the third [pd:d] 
the fourth [fo:p] 
the fifth [fifp] 
the sixth f siksp] 
the seventh [sevnp] 
the eighth [eitp] 
the ninth [nainp] 
the tenth [tenp] 
the eleventh [i'levnp] 
the twelfth [twelfp] 
the thirteenth ['pd:'ti:np] 
the fourteenth 
['fo:'ti:np] 
the fifteenth \'fifti:np] 
the sixteenth ['siks'ti:np] 
562 
The Fifty-Second (52nd) Chapter. 
17 seventeen 
[ { sevn'ti:n] 
18 eighteen ['ei'ti:n] 
19 nineteen 
['tidin'ti:n] 
20 twenty [twenti] 
21 twenty-one 
[twenti'wAn], etc. 
30 thirty [ pa:ti] 
40 forty [fo:ti] 
50 fifty [ fifti ] 
60 sixty [siksti] 
70 seventy [ sevnti ] 
80 eighty [eiti] 
90 ninety [nainti] 
100 a (or one) hun¬ 
dred [ hxndrdd ] 
101 a (or one) hun¬ 
dred and one 
135 a (or one) hundred 
and thirty-five 
200 two hundred 
1,000 a (or one) thousand 
[pauzand ] 
1,001 a (or one) thou¬ 
sand and one 
1,100 eleven hundred or 
a (or one) thou¬ 
sand one hundred 
1,157 eleven hundred 
and fifty-seven or 
a (one) thousand 
one hundred and 
fifty-seven 
2,000 two thousand 
100,000 a (or one) hun¬ 
dred thousand 
the seventeenth 
['sevn'timp] 
the eighteenth [ x ei'ti:np] 
the nineteenth 
[ l nain x ti:np] 
the twentieth [twentiip] 
the twenty-first [twenti- 
1 fd:st\, etc. 
the thirtieth [pditiip] 
the fortieth [fj:tiip] 
the fiftieth \fiftiip\ 
the sixtieth [sikstiip] 
the seventieth [sevntiip] 
the eightieth [eitiip] 
the ninetieth [naintiip] 
the (one) hundredth 
[ JiAndrddp ] 
the (one) hundred and 
first 
the (one) hundred and 
thirty-fifth 
the two hundredth 
the (one) thousandth 
[pauzandp ] 
the (one) thousand and 
first 
the eleven hundredth or 
the (one) thousand 
one hundredth 
the eleven hundred and 
fifty-seventh or the 
(one) thousand one 
hundred and fifty- 
seventh 
the two thousandth 
the (one) hundred thou¬ 
sandth 
563 
Chapter Fifty-Two (52). 
341,771 three hundred 
and forty-one 
thousand seven 
hundred and 
seventy-one 
1,000,000 a (or one) million 
[miljon\ 
3,000,533 three million 
five hundred and 
thirty-three 
the three hundred and 
forty-one thousand 
seven hundred and 
seventy-first 
the (one) millionth 
[miljdnp] 
the three million five 
hundred and thirty- 
third 
Notice that with a few exceptions the ordinals are made 
by adding th to the cardinals. Examples: The thirteen 
-th, the eleven-th. 
Questions: 
How would you write the following figures in letters: 
5, 9, 17, 19, 32, 51, 143, 701, 1,003, 53,731; 7th, 12th, 32nd, 
148th, 1,005th, 47,457th? ... 
EXERCISE D. 
did wud, 
it woz nais id get jo: letd dn hid SAmpiy d'baut hwot 
iz gouiy on dt houm. sou ju: hdv bi:n teikiy mai 
sistd fd trips intd dd kAntri! wel, ai ridli dount non 
hwot td sei to dcet. if ju: a:nt gouiy to bi: mo: 
keoful in do fju:tfo d'baut teikiy ho:r out intu o:l 
kaindz ov wedo on briyiy ho: b(ek houm o:l wet on 
kould, ai so'pouz ai jot luev to rait on tel ho: hwot 
on An'pleznt felou ju: a:! bot po'hceps ji:l faind aut 
fd ho .'self. 
564 
The Fifty-Second (52nd) Chapter. 
ai zvent on d trip into do kAntri mat self sam taim 
o'gou zvid a ;aij leidi ko:ld mcerian, da do: tar av aua 
mcenid^a. bat ai had o:dad a blu: skai, da sirjirj ov 
ba:dz, and a zvud ful av tri:z zvid red an braun li:vz; 
dcets haxi its dAn in iygland! mcerian iz a veri IavU 
ga:l, ai kan tel ju:. ju: kan si: dcet fa jo:' self from 
dis piktfar av ha:, hzvitf ai tuk dcet dei in da kAntri . 
pli:z dount tel dis ta mai sista, o:r aim a'freid dat 
fi: zvil not fi:l da ris'pekt fo: mi: dat sistaz fad hcev 
fa dear elda brAdaz. bat ju: mei rtmemba mi: ta 
ha:, an ta da rest av da fcemili. 
jo:z sin'siali, 
sto:m 
565 
Chapter Fifty-Three (53). 
The Fifty-Third (53rd) Chapter. 
A TRIP TO BRIGHTON 
When Storm started working at the office, it was 
hwen sta:m sta:tid wa:kiy at di afis, it waz 
decided that he should only remain as long as the 
di'saidid ddt hi: fad ounli ri'mein az lay dz da 
clerk whose work he was taking care of was ill. But 
kla:k hu:z iva:k hi: waz teikiy kear av waz il. bat 
when the clerk was able to take over his own work 
hwen da kla:k waz eibl ta teik onva hiz oun wa:k 
again at the beginning of the new year, the manager 
a'gein at da bi'giniy av da nju: jia, da mcenid^a 
wanted Storm to stay on for a few months longer. 
wontid sta:m ta stei an far a fju: m.xnps hyga. 
“I shall be very busy the next eight months or so. 
“ai jal bi: veri bizi da nekst eit mAnps a: sou. 
We’re planning to open some new branch offices, so it 
wia plceniy tu oupan sam nju: bra:nf afisiz, sou it 
would be nice to have you as a sort of private secretary. 
zvad bi: nais ta hcev ju: az a sa:t av praivit sekratri. 
I shall need your help very badly.” 
ai jal ni:d ja: help veri bcedli” 
Storm was only too glad to get this chance of staying 
sta:m waz ounli tu: glced ta get dis tja:ns av steiiy 
on, because he wanted to see the spring in England, 
an, bi'kaz hi: wantid ta si: da spriy in iygland, 
566 
The Fifty-Third (53rd) Chapter. 
of which he had heard so much. A week later every- 
av Jnvitf hi: had ha:d sou m\tj. a zvi:k leita wri¬ 
thing had been settled; he was to stay in England as 
pit) had bi:n setld ; hi: was ta stei in iy gland as 
long as the manager needed him. 
lay as da manid^a ni:did him . 
So when May came he was still in London, working 
sou hwcn mei keim hi: was stil in l\ndan y wa:kiy 
hard. Summer had come, and as the weather had been 
hct:d. sMiia had k\m, and as da weda had bi:n 
extremely fine for several days, Marshall and Storm 
iks'tri :mli fain fa sevral deis , ma:fal and sta:m 
decided to go to the seaside for the week-end after a 
di'saidid ta gou la da 'si:'said fa da 1 wi:k'end a:ftar a 
particularly busy week. 
pa'tikjulali bisi wi:k. 
“A week-end at the sea-side would do us good after 
“a 'wi:k'cnd at da 'si:'said 1 wad du: as gud a:ftar 
a week’s hard work,” Marshall said, “and even if it may 
a wi:ks lia:d zva:k” ma:fal sed, (C and i:van if it mei 
still be a little cold to bathe, the sea will be beautiful, 
stil bi: a litl kould ta beid, da si: wil bi: bju:taful , 
and the fresh sea-air will be nice after the bad London 
an da fref 'si:'sa wil bi: mis a:fta da bced l And an 
air.” “What is the best place on the coast to go to?” 
ea” (C hwat is da best pleis an da konst ta gou tut* 
Storm wanted to know. “I think Brighton will be 
sta:m wantid ta non. (: ai piyk braitn wil bi: 
567 
Chapter Fifty-Three (53). 
best,” Marshall answered. “It’s a pleasant town on 
best” via :fdl a:nsdd. “its a plesnt taun an 
the south coast of England. We could stay the night 
da setup konst av iy gland. wi: kad stei da nait 
at one of the hotels and return on Sunday evening.” 
at w\n av da hou'teb an rfta:n an sAiidi i:vniy.” 
“Fine!” said Storm. “Let's hurry home from the 
“/a////” sed sta:m. “lets li\ri houm frain di 
office, then, without stopping for lunch at our usual 
of is, den, zvid'aut stapiy fa Unf at ctua jtrytal 
place. Perhaps your mother will prepare a quick 
pleis. pa'heeps ja: in Ada 7C dl pri'pear a kwik 
lunch for us at home while we throw a few things 
| ^ A;/ / f 3r AS h° ltm hwail wi: P r °u z fj li: piy~ 
into a bag.” “We shan't need much more than a 
intu a beeg” “wi: fa:nt ni:d niAtf rna: dan a 
tooth-brush and a comb, so there won’t be much to 
tit:pbrAj and a koum, sou dr.a wonnt bi: niAtf ta 
pack. We'll have time enough before our train leaves.” 
peek. ivi:l hav taim i'liAf bi'fa:r ctua trein li:vz 
“Speaking of tooth-brushes,” Storm said, “I must 
“spi:kiy av tu: pbrAfic” sta:m sed, “ ai mast 
remember to buy some tooth-paste on the way home. 
ri'memba ta beti sain tu:ppeist an da wei houm. 
I noticed this morning, when I was brushing my teeth, 
ai noutist dis ma:niy, hwen ai zvas brAfiy max ti:p t 
one tooth 
two teeth 
that I had used up all my tooth-paste. I think I'll try 
dat ai had ju:zd a p a:l mai tu:ppeist. ai piyk ail trai 
568 
The Fifty-Third (53rd) Chapter. 
a shop I’ve often noticed. It’s only a short distance 
a Jap a:v a:fn noutist. its ounli a fa:t distdns 
from the Underground station, you know, the one which 
fram di Andagraund steijan, ju: nou, da w\n hzvitf 
has an unusually large sponge lying in the window. 
J\az an ah' ju:$itali laid 3 spAnd$ laiiy in da windou. 
It must be fun to use a sponge as big as that in the 
it mast hi: Jah ta ju:z a spAnd 3 az big az dcet in da 
bath; you could almost wash the whole body with it 
ba:p; ju: had a:lmoust waf da houl badi zvid it 
sponge 
at once. I saw some beautiful brushes there the other 
at zvaus. cii sa: sam bju:taful brAfiz dea di Ada 
day, too. I'd like to buy them for my sister. She takes 
dci, tu:. aid laik ta bai dam fa mai sista. fi: teiks 
a lot of trouble with her hair and brushes it carefully take trouble with 
a lat av tr aM zvid ha: hea an brAfiz it keafuli with™ 1 * carefully 
morning and night; so those fine brushes would be just 
ma:nifj an naif; sou douz fain brAfiz zvad hi: d$Ast 
the thing for her, one for her hair and one to brush 
da pig fa ha zvau fa ha: hea an zvah ta brAf 
her clothes with. Perhaps there's a comb to go with 
ha: kloudz zvid. pa'hcups daz a koum ta gou zvid 
them, too.” 
dam, tu:” 
“Well, don't be too long about your shopping,” Marshall 
“zvel, dount bi: tu: lay a 1 bout ja: fapiy ” mo:fat 
said. “I shall have to look for my bathing-costume. 
sod. “ai fal hcrz> ta luk fa mai beidiykastju :m. 
569 
Chapter Fifty-Three (53). 
My mother puts it away every winter, and never twice 
mai m\da puts it nwci cvri 7 vinta, an nova twais 
in the same place, so I can’t be sure of finding it at 
in do scini plcis, sou ai kcr.nt hi: juor ov faindiy it at 
one e.” 
7V MIS.” 
“Do you think it will be warm enough to bathe?” Storm 
“du: ju: piyk it wil hi: 7oo:m i'n.xf id beid?” sto:m 
asked. “Then I’ll take my bathing-drawers, too.” 
a:skt. “den ail teik mai beidiydro:z. tu:.” 
“Bathing-drawers!” Marshall said. “Haven’t you got 
“beidiydro:z!” ma:fdl sed. “hermit ju: got 
a bathing-costume? At one time you were not allowed 
a beidiykostju :mf ot 70x11 taim ju: 700: not o'laud 
to use bathing-drawers, but nowadays it’s perfectly all 
td ju:z beidiydro :z, bdt nauddeiz its po:fiktli o:l 
right of course. However, we English are funny in 
rait dv ko:s. hau'evd, 70 i: iyglij a: f.xni in 
many ways, you know. By some people bathing- 
meni weiz, ju: non. bai saih pi: pi beidiy- 
drawers are still regarded as not quite the thing for 
dro:z a: stil ri'ga:did dz not kwait da piy fa 
bathing.” “Well, I haven’t got anything else, so I’ll 
bcidiy” “7oeI, ai luevnt got enipiy els, sou ail 
have to take them along,” Storm answered. 
luev ta teik dam a'loy” sto:m a: ns ad. 
570 
Two hours later the two young men were sitting in 
tu: auaz leita da tu: j.\y men 7 va: sitiy in 
The Fifty-Third (53rd) Chapter. 
a bus on their way to Brighton. “The distance from 
a 1?as an dea wci ta braitn. “dd distans fram 
London to Brighton is only about fifty miles,” Marshall 
Undan ta braitn iz ounli a'baut fifti mailz” ma:fal 
explained, “so I thought we might go there by bus 
iks'pleind, “sou ai pa:t zvi: limit gon dea bai Ijas 
instead of by train. The country between London and 
in'sted av bai trcin . da kxntri bi'tzvim Undan an 
Brighton is very beautiful, and you’ll see more from 
braitn iz veri bjn:taful, an ju:l si: ma: fram 
the bus. The trees will be looking their best now; 
da b\s. da tri:z zvil bi: lukirj dea best nan; 
there will be flowers in bright colours by the roadside, 
dea zvil bi: flanaz in brait kwlaz bai da rondsaid, 
and the leaves and the grass will be of that lovely 
an da li:vz an da gra:s zvil bi: av dcct Uvli 
fresh green that they only have during the weeks 
fref grim dat dci onnli Jucv djnariij da zvi:ks 
when spring is turning into summer. I want you to 
hzvcn sprig iz tarnitj hit a SAina. ai want ju: ta 
see England at its very best — in May, in the country, 
si: iggland. at its veri best — in mei , in da kAiitri, 
when everything is fresh and clean and full of peace 
hwen evripiy iz fref an kli:n an fnl av pi:s 
and beauty. 
an bju:ti. 
“It’s funny, isn’t it, that although I should not like to 
u its fAni, iznt it, dat a:Vdon ai fad nat laik ta 
by the roadside = 
by the side of the 
road 
571 
Chapter Fifty-Three (53). 
in the distance = 
far away 
windmill 
live in the country, May always makes me wish to 
liv in dd kAntri, met o:lwdz meiks mi: wij td 
spend the summer in the country, to see the corn 
spend dd s Ain dr in dd kAntri, td si: dd ko:n 
standing green in the fields and the cows happy in 
standiy gri:n in dd- fi:ldz dii dd kauz ha pi in 
lovely deep grass.” 
IavU di:p gra:s” 
“I quite understand how you feel,” Storm replied, “and 
“ai kwait Andd'stand hau ju: fi:l,” sto:m ri 1 plaid, cs dnd 
I’m glad we came by bus. I’m really seeing the country 
aim glad wi: keim bai bAS. aim ridli si:iy dd kAntri 
this way. Look, Marshall,” he continued, “isn’t that 
dis wei. luk, ma.fdl” hi: kdn'tinju :d, “iznt dat 
a windmill we can see in the distance?” “Yes, it is,” 
d windmil wi: kdn si: in dd distdns?” “jes, it iz” 
Marshall replied. “We still have a few left, although 
ma:jdl ri'plaid, “wi: stil hav d fju: left, o:l [ dou 
in most places factories have taken over the work of 
in moast pleisiz faktdriz lidv teikn ouvd dd wa:k dv 
making corn into flour, which the windmills used to do. 
meikiy ko:n intd flaud, hwitj dd windmilz ju:st td du:. 
Factories can make flour cheaper, I suppose. And as 
faktdriz kdn meik flaud tfi:pd, ai sd'pouz. dnd dz 
bread is such a large part of the nation’s food, it’s 
bred iz s\tf d la:d$ pa:t dv dd neifdnz fu:d, its 
important, of course, that flour should be cheap.” 
im'pd:tdnt, dv kj:s, ddt flaud fdd hi: tji:p” 
572 
The Fifty-Third (53rd) Chapter. 
“What a lot of work must be done to the corn,” Storm 
“hzv.it a Lit av zva:k mast bi: d\n td da k.i:n” st.i:m 
said as he looked out over the fields, “in the course of 
scd az hi: lukt aut oava da fi:ldz, “in da ka:s av 
the months from the time when the farmer puts the 
da ntAtips fram da taint hum da fa:ma puts da 
plough into the ground in spring until we put the bread 
plan inta da ground in sprig ah' til z vi: put da bred 
on our tables! When the ground has been broken by 
an ana teiblz! hzvcn da ground has bi:n broukn hoi 
the plough, the seed is put in, and then after five or 
da plan, da si:d iz put in, an den o:fta fob a 
six months the corn is ready to be taken to the mills, 
silcs mMips da ka:n iz redi ta bi: teikn ta da mHz . 
or factories, to be made into flour, and at last it is 
a: fcektariz, ta bi: meid inta floua, and at lo:st it iz 
made into bread. When the corn has been taken to the 
meid inta bred. hzven da ka:n haz bi:n teikn ta da 
mills, there is still something left of the plant, which 
mHz, daz stil sAinpig left av da plo:nt, h7vitf 
is used for the animals during the winter. Not all the 
iz ju:zd fa di animals djuarig da zvinta. nat a:l da 
corn is sent to the mills; some of it is used for next 
ka:n iz sent ta da mHz: saw av it iz ju:zd fa nekst 
year’s seed.” 
jiaz si:d” 
“Yes,” Marshall replied. “In town you usually don’t 
“jcs” mo:jal ri'ploid. “in toun ju: jir.ytali dount 
573 
Chapter Fifty-Three (53). 
think of these things. You go into a shop, ask for some 
piyk dv di:z piyz. jit: gou in tit a jap, a:sk fa sain 
bread, and in the course of a minute or two you leave 
bred , and in da ka:s av a minit a in: jit: Ii:v 
grow (here) ~~ 
make grow 
the shop with the bread you have bought. Just as easy 
da fap ivid da bred ju: hav ba:t. d$.\st az i:zi 
as buying potatoes, and yet, how much more easily 
az Ixtiiy pa'teitouz , an jet , lwu m\tf nu:r i:zili 
potatoes are grown!” 
pa'teitoitz a: groun!” 
Time passed quickly on the road. Every few minutes 
taint pa:st kwikli an da roud. evri fju: minits 
the view changed. They passed through some small 
da vju: tfeindyl. dei pa:st pru: sain snia:I 
towns with beautiful old houses, between rose-bushes 
taunz zvid bjn:taful ould hauziz , bi'tzci:n rouzbufiz 
that grew in long rows along both sides of the road, 
dat grit: in lay rouz a lay boup soidz av da roud. 
full of red and white flowers, or looked over bright 
fid av red and hwait flauaz, a: Inkt oitva brait 
green fields, pleasantly broken by a few trees here 
gri:n fi.ldz, plezntli broukn bai a fju: tri:z hiar 
and there, a thing which is typically English. They 
and dea, a piy hwitf iz tipi kali iyglif . dei 
arrived at Brighton about four o’clock, and one of the 
a'raivd at broitn a l batit fa:r a'klak, and vo\n av da 
first things they did when they reached their hotel 
fa:st piyz dei did Inven dei ri:tft dea hou'tel 
574 
The Fifty-Third (53rd) Chapter. 
was to order tea. 
7 voz tu o:do ti:. 
‘Til take mine with lemon to-day,” Storm said. “I like 
“ail tcik wain wid lemdn to'dci,” sto:m scd. “ai laik 
it best that way when I’m hot and thirsty. Won’t you 
it best deet zvei Inven aim hot on f>o:sti. wount jit: 
try it, too, Marshall? You won’t regret it.” “Yes, I’ll 
frai it, tu:, ma:jol? ju: wount ri'gret it.” u jes, ail 
take lemon in my tea, too, for once,” Marshall replied. 
tcik lemon in mai ti:, tu:, fo w.\ns ” ma:fol r\ plaid. 
“But I’ll have to take at least three lumps of sugar 
“hot ail herv to teik ot li:st pri: l.xmps ov fugo 
to make it sweet enough. Oh, I say, Storm, look at that 
to meik it swi:t i'n.xf. on, ai sei, storm, Ink ot dcct 
little dog, over there! He’s looking at our sugar as if 
litl dog, ouvo dco! hi:z lukiij ot auo fugor oz if 
we’d taken it from him. We’ll have to give him a lump 
wi:d teikn it from him. wi:l heev to giv him o l\mp 
of sugar. He doesn’t look as if he belongs to anybody 
ov fugo. hi: d.xznt Ink oz if hi: bi'loyz tu enibodi 
here; he must have come here by himself.” 
hio: hi: most hov k\m hio bai him'self ” 
While they were having tea, a band started playing 
hwail dci wo: hccviij ti:, o beend sta:tid pleiiy 
in the restaurant. “Do people dance here in the after- 
in do restoro:y. “du: pi: pi da: ns hi or in di a:fto- 
noons?” Storm asked, noticing that they were playing 
x nu:nz?” sto:m a:skt, noutisiy dot dci wo: pleiiy 
lemon 
by himself = 
alone 
575 
Chapter Fifty-Three (53). 
dance-music. “No, not at this hotel,” Marshall replied. 
da:nsmju:zik. “non, nat at dis hoi/tel / 3 ma:jdl ri plaid. 
“But there are several restaurants where you can dance 
“bat dea sevral restara:yz hwea ju: kan da:ns 
at this time of the day. There will be dancing here 
at dis taim av da dci. dea wil hi: da: ns it] hi a 
to-night, though, as far as I know. Have you noticed 
ta'nait, dou, az fa:r az ai non. liav ju: non fist 
that they have seven or eight instruments that they 
dat dci liav scvn ar cit instrumants dat dci 
aren’t using? I suppose that means there will be a 
a:nt ju:ziyf ai sa'pouz dcct mi:nz dr a wil hi: a 
larger band playing later on, and that there will be 
la:d$a band pleiirj leitar an , an dat dra wil hi: 
dancing then. Would you like to go to some other place 
da.nsirj den. wad ju: laik ta gou ta saw \da plcis 
to dance?” 
ta da:nsf” 
“No, dancing on a nice afternoon like this has no 
“non, da:nsifj an a nais a:fta'nu:n laik dis haz non 
attraction for me,” Storm said. “Besides, I want to 
a'trcekfan fa mi :/ 3 sta:m sed. “hisaidz, ai zvant ta 
see as much of the town as possible while we are here.” 
si: az m.\tf ay da taun az pasabl hzvail wi: a: hia . 33 
“Right you are! Let’s go, then,” Marshall answered. 
“rait ju: a:! lets gou, den / 3 ma:fal a:nsad. 
“We might walk about a bit. I want to show you the 
“wi: wait wa:k a'baut a bit. ai want ta fou ju: di 
576 
The Fifty-Third (53rd) Chapter. 
attractions of the town — just like a professional guide: 
a'trcekjanz av da taun — d^Ast laik a pra'fefanal gaid: 
Here, ladies and gentlemen, you see ..., etc. Brighton 
hid, leidiz an d^entlman, ju: si: .. it'setra. braitn 
is full of cinemas, theatres, restaurants, music-halls, 
iz ful av sinimaz, piataz, restaraiyz, mju:zikha:lz, 
and all kinds of places where you can have a good 
and a:l kaindz av pleisiz hwea ju: kan hcev a gud 
time. I really think that although Brighton is a 
taini. ai riali pirjk dat a:l'dou braitn iz a 
seaside town, its attraction for many of the people 
'si:'said taun , its e'trcekfan fa meni av da pi: pi 
who come here lies more in these things than in the 
hit: kxm hi a laiz ma:r in di:z pirjz dan in da 
beach,” Marshall explained as they left the hotel. 
bi:tf” ma:jal iks'pleind az dei left da hou'tel. 
“Really?” Storm asked. “You would think that, first 
“riali?” sta:m a:skt. “ju: wad piyk dat, fa:st 
of all, people come here to bathe, since this street, with 
av a:l, pi:pi k\m hia ta beid, sins dis stri:t, wid 
all these hotels on one side, is situated almost at the 
a:l di:z hou'telz an wxn said , iz sitjueitid a:lmoust at da 
very edge of the sea. You only have to walk a few 
veri ed$ av da si:. ju: ounli hcev ta wa:k a fju: 
steps across the street, and you find yourself on the 
steps a'kras da stri:t, an ju: faind ja: l self an da 
beach. What is the beach like here?” “It's rather 
bi:tf. hwat iz da bi:tf laik hia?” “its ra:da 
hall (here) = very 
large room 
music-hall = 
a sort of theatre 
with music, 
singing, and 
dancing 
577 
Chapter Fifty-Three (53). 
good,” Marshall replied. “On this part of the coast, 
gud ” ma:fal rf plaid. “on dis pa:t ov do koust , 
the beach generally consists of small round stones 
da bi:tf d^enarali kan'sists av smo:l ra-und stounz 
which don’t hurt the feet at all. In fact, many people 
hwitf dount ha:t da fi:t dt o:l. in fcekt, meni pi:pl 
prefer these small stones to sand. ‘Sand , 5 they say, 
pri'fa: di:z smo:l stounz ta scend. 'scend? dei set, 
‘gets into your shoes and your stockings and your hair 
‘gets inta jo: Ju:z an jo: stokiijz an jo: hea 
and gives you a lot of trouble before you get it out.’ 
an givz jit: a lot av trAbl bi'fo: ju: get it autd 
However, if you prefer sand, I know a place not very 
hau'eva , if ju: pri'fa: scend , ai nou a pleis not veri 
far from here where the beach has lovely red sand. 
fa: from hid hwea da bi:tf Jtaz IavU red scend . 
We might go out there to-morrow.” 
wi: mait gou aut dea ta'morou” 
“I think I’d rather try this place,” Storm answered. 
“ai pitjk aid ra:da troi dis pleis , 33 sto:m a:nsad. 
“Perhaps there’s sand enough on the shores of your 
“pa x hceps daz scend i'nAf on da fo:z av jo:r 
own country,” Marshall said. “I think I prefer the 
oun kAntri” ma:jal sed. “ai piyk ai pri'fa: da 
stones myself; they’re quite comfortable to lie on.” 
stounz / nai'self; dea kwait kwmfatabl ta lai on. >} 
“Just a minute,” Storm interrupted, “I must ask you 
“d$ASt a minit , 33 sto:m inta'rAptid, “ai mast a:sk ju: 
578 
The Fifty-Third (53rd) Chapter. 
to explain the meaning of a word you used just now 
tu iks'plein dd mi:niy dv d wa:d ju: ju:zd d$Ast nau 
— ‘shore*, I think it was.” “With pleasure,” Marshall 
— ai piyk it woz” “wid pletf,” ma:jdl 
replied. “It means almost the same as ‘beach*, but 
ri'plaid. “it mi:nz o:lmoust dd seim dz c bi:tf y , bdt 
not quite. Both ‘beach* and ‘shore* mean ‘land at the 
rut kwait. boup ‘ bi:tj * dn *fj: y mi:n Hand dt di 
edge of a sea or a lake*. But while ‘beach* is only 
ed$ dv d si: o:r d leik\ bdt hwail € bi:tf y iz ounli 
used about a low piece of land with sand or small 
ju:zd d'baut d lou pi:s dv land wid sand o: smo:l 
stones at the edge of the sea or at the edge of a large 
stounz dt di ed$ dv dd si: o:r dt di ed$ dv d la:d 3 
lake, ‘shore* may also be used where the land rises 
leik , *fd : 9 mei o:lsou bi: ju:zd hwsd dd land raiziz 
sharply out of the sea without any low piece of land 
fa:pli aut dv dd si: wid'aut eni lou pi:s ov land 
at the edge of the water, as for instance at Dover. So 
dt di ed$ dv dd wo:td, dz fdr instdns dt douvd. sou 
you see, a ‘beach* is always a ‘shore*, but a ‘shore* is 
ju: si:, 0 *bi:tj y iz o:lwdz 0 ‘Jo: 9 , bdt d K fo: y iz 
only a ‘beach* if it has small round stones or sand — 
ounli d *bi:tf y if it hdz smo:l raund stounz o: sand — 
if you know what I mean.” “Thanks! I think I do,” 
if ju: nou hwot ai mi:n” “payks! ai piyk ai du:” 
Storm said. “At least I know enough to be able to 
stj:m sed. “dt li:st ai nou i'n\f td bi: eibl td 
579 
Chapter Fifty-Three (53). 
find out the rest when I read the word or hear some- 
faind aut da rest hwen ai ri:d da wa:d o: hia sam- 
body use it. But tell me, don’t you think we might 
badi ju:z it. bat tel mi:, dount ju: piyk wi: mait 
be able to get a boat somewhere?” “Yes, that’s easy 
bi: eibl ta get a bout SAmhwea ?” “jes, dcets i:zi 
enough,” Marshall replied. “There isn’t wind enough 
i'nxf , 33 ma:jal ri'plaid. (C dar iznt wind i'nAp 
for sails, though, and, besides, I’m not very used to 
fa seilz, dou, an, bi'saidz, aim not veri ju:st ta 
boats with sails, so I should prefer one of the small 
bouts wid seilz, sou ai fad pri'fa: WAn av da sma:l 
boats that you see down there on the beach.” “You 
bouts dat ju: si: daun dear an da bi:tf” “ju: 
need not be afraid,” Storm said, “I know all about 
ni:d nat bi: a'freid,” sta:m sed, “ai nou a:l a'baut 
boats and sails, so I’ll take care of that side of the 
bouts an seilz, sou ail teik kear av dcet said av da 
matter.” “Oh, in that case,” Marshall answered, “I 
mceta . 33 “ou, in dcet keis,” ma:jal a:nsad, “ai 
don’t care which we go out in, as long as you’ll be 
dount kea hwitf wi: gou aut in, az lag az ju:l bi: 
the captain. But I think it would be a good idea to 
da kceptin. bat ai piyk it wad bi: a gud ai'dia ta 
wait until this evening before going out,” he continued. 
weit An' til dis i:vniy bi'fa: gouiy aut / 3 hi: kentinju.d. 
“As far as I remember, there will be a moon to-night, 
“az fa:r az ai ri'memba, dea wil bi: a mu:n ta'nait, 
580 
The Fifty-Third (53rd) Chapter. 
and if the weather doesn’t change, the stars will be 
and if da weda dAznt tjeind 3 , da sta:z wil bi: 
out, too. But after all we had better take one of the 
aut, tu:. bat aiftar ail wi: had beta teik wah av da 
small boats, for what little wind there is will be gone 
smo:l bouts , fa hwat litl wind dar iz wil bi: gan 
to-night.” 
ta'nait” 
The sea was as smooth as glass when they went out 
da si: waz az smu:3 az gla:s hwen dei went aut 
in a small boat that evening. There was not a single 
in a small bout dcet iivniy. dea waz nat a siygl 
wave on the surface of the water. 
weiv an da saifis av da waita. 
“What a lovely sight it is,” Marshall said, “with the 
<( hwat a IavU sait it iz” maifal sed, “wid da 
moon and the stars up there in the sky and, at the 
mum an da sta:z a p dear in da skai and, at da 
same time, shining back at us from the smooth surface 
seim taim, jainiy bcek at as fram da smuid saifis 
of the sea, and all the lights from the many hotels on 
av da sii, and ail da laits fram da meni hou x telz an 
the shore.” “Yes, I’m glad we waited till it was dark; 
da fai” “jes, aim glced wi: weitid til it waz daik; 
it’s a sight I shan’t forget,” Storm replied. 
its a sait ai faint fa'get,” staim ri'plaid. 
When they got on shore again, Marshall suggested that 
hwen dei gat an fair a'gein, maifal sa'd$estid dat 
581 
Chapter Fifty-Three (53). 
they should have a look at the night-life of Brighton. 
dei fad hcev a luk at da naitlaif av braitn. 
“Our night-life is not what they call ‘hot’ in America, 
“aua naitlaif iz not hwot dei ko:l e hot’ in a'merika, 
but we might look in at a few places and see* if there’s 
bat wi: mait luk in at a fju: pleisiz an si: if daz 
going on = taking 
place 
any fun going on anywhere.” 
eni f\n gouiy on enihwea ." 
They did as Marshall suggested and passed a very 
dei did az ma:fal sa'd^estid and pa:st a veri 
pleasant evening, returning about eleven o’clock to 
pleznt i'.vnifj, ri'ta:niy a x baut ilevn a'khk ta 
their hotel to have a glass of something in the restaurant 
dea hou'tel ta hcev a gla:s av sAmpiy in da restart:y 
turn in = go to 
bed 
before ‘turning in’. The band was much larger now 
bi'fa: Ha.nirj in’ da bcend waz MAtf la:d$a nau 
than in the afternoon, and all the musical instruments 
dan in di a:fta'nu:n } and o:l da mju:zikal instrumants 
were being used. 
wa: bi:iy ju:zd. 
“It’s almost too much of a good thing with all the noise 
(e its o:lmoust tu: mAtf av a gud piy wid o:l da noiz 
the band is making now,” Storm said; “I liked it better 
da bcend iz meikiy nausto:m sed; “ai laikt it betar 
in the afternoon.” “That’s because we aren’t dancing,” 
in di a:fta'nu:n” <e dcets bi'kaz wi: a:nt da:nsiy,” 
Marshall replied. “Could we do that?” Storm asked. 
ma:fal riplaid. <( kud wi: du: dcet?” sto:m a:skt. 
582 
The Fifty-Third (53rd) Chapter. 
“Yes, it’s quite proper to dance with girls you don’t 
“jes, its kwait propa td da:ns wid ga:lz ju: dount 
know at seaside places like this,” Marshall answered. 
nou dt 1 si : 1 said pleisiz laik dis,” ma:jdl a: ns ad. 
“There will often be girls staying with their families 
(C dea wil o:fn bi: ga:lz steiiy wid dea fcemiliz 
at the hotel, or young women spending a little holiday 
at da hou'tel, o: jAy wimin spendiy a litl holidi 
alone, who are usually glad to have a few dances with 
a x loun, hu: a: ju:$uali glad ta hav a fju: da:nsiz wid 
you. Let’s see if we can find two pleasant-looking 
ju:. lets si: if wi: kan faind tu: plezntlukiy 
girls.” “Look over there, Marshall, at the three women 
ga:lz.” (C luk ouva dea, ma:jal, at da pri: wimin 
at that table, especially the one to the left. What on 
at deet teibl, is'pefali da wau ta da left, hwot on 
earth is she doing?” “I think she’s beating time to the 
a:p iz fi: du:iyf” “ai piyk fi:z bi:tiy taim ta da 
music with her hand,” he answered, “perhaps to show 
mju:zik wid ha: hand” hi: a:nsad, “pa'hceps ta jou 
that she can dance and is willing to, if anybody should 
dat fi: kan da:ns and iz wiliy tu, if enibodi fad 
ask her. I must say they’re a strange collection, those 
a:sk ha:, ai mAst sei dear a streind$ ka'lekfan, douz 
three! They must be at least fifteen years older than 
pri:! dei mast bi: at li:st fifti:n jiaz oulda dan 
they’re trying to appear. Look at the other one, now! 
dea traiiy tu a'pia. luk at di Ada wau, nau! 
appear (here) — 
look 
583 
Chapter Fifty-Three (53). 
She is putting still more red ‘paint’ on her lips and 
Ji: iz putty stil mo: red ( peint* on ho: lips on 
powder on her nose and cheeks. I wonder what they 
paudor on ha: nous an tfi:ks. ai wAnda hwot dei 
look like under that surface of powder and paint?” 
luk laik Anda dcet sa:fis av paudar an peint? >} 
“You should look over there instead,” Storm said, 
“ju: lad luk ouva dear in'sted” sto:m sed, 
noticing two girls of about twenty entering the restaurant 
noutisiy tu: ga:lz av a'baut twenti entariy da restaro.y 
in the company of a man who looked old enough to be 
in da kAmpani av a mean hu: lukt ould i'nAf ta bi: 
their grandfather. They were tall and good-looking, 
dea grcendfa:da. dei wa: to:l and gudlukiy, 
not beautiful, but with the clear skin and rosy lips and 
not bju:taful, bat wid da klia skin and rousi lips and 
cheeks for which English women are famous. “Have 
tfi:ks fa hwitf iyglif wimin a: feimas. cc hav 
you noticed the way the smaller of them is walking in 
ju: noutist da wei da smo:lar av dam is wo:kiy in 
time to the music? Musical people often do that. I 
taim ta da mju:zik? mju:zikal pi:pi o:fn du: dcet. ai 
am sure she dances well.” 
am jua ji: da:nsiz wel ." 
In fact, both girls moved across the dance-floor with the 
in feekt, boup ga:lz mu:vd a'kros da da:nsflo: wid da 
grace of young animals. “If they dance with as much 
greis av j\y cenimalz. “if dei da:ns wid az mAtj 
584 
The Fifty-Third (53rd) Chapter. 
grace as they walk, it should be lovely to dance with 
yreis az dei wa:k, it fad bi: IavU td da:ns wid 
them. Do you think they will dance with us?” Storm 
dam. da: ju: piyk dei wil da:ns wid as?” sta:m 
asked. “We can only find that out by asking them. 
a:skt. “wi: kdn ounli faind dcet aut bai a:skit) dam. 
But let’s give them a chance to taste their wine, or 
bat lets giv dam a tfa:ns ta teist dea wain, o: 
whatever they’re having, before we ask them. Did 
Imot'eva dea hcevirj, bi'fa: wi: a:sk dam. did 
you notice that they are both wearing very beautiful 
ju: noutis dat dei a: boup wearirj veri bju:taful 
jewels round their necks?” Marshall continued. “As 
dyi.alz round dea neks?” ma:jal kan'tinju:d. “az 
far as I can see from here, the tall girl’s jewels are 
fa:r az oi lean si: fram kia, da ta:l ga:lz d$u:alz a: 
quite like her sister’s, except that the stones of their 
kwait laik ha: sistaz, ik'sept dat da stounz av dea 
jewels are of different colours. For I suppose that they 
d$u:alz a:r av difrant kAlaz. far oi sa'pouz dat dei 
must be sisters.” 
mast bi: sistaz.” 
“I shouldn’t wonder if they are,” Storm said. “How 
“oi fudnt WAndar if dei a:,” sto:m sed. (( hau 
different these two are from the three painted ladies 
difrant di:z tu: a: fram da pri: peintid leidiz 
over there. You can easily see that when you compare 
ouva dea. ju: kan i:zili si: dcet hwen ju: kampea 
585 
Chapter Fifty-Three (53). 
the quiet good taste of the two girls* jewels with the 
da kwaiat gnd teist av da hi: gj.b d$u:alz wit 5 da 
auntie = aunt 
‘loud’ jewels our three ‘aunties* have hung round their 
Hand 9 dyi:alz ana pri: *a:ntiz y hav h\y round dsa 
thin necks — gold and silver, and stones in all colours!” 
pin neks — gould an silva. an si mine in a:l hwlae!” 
“Yes, I suppose their jewels must be expensive, but 
“jes, ai sa'pouz dea derate mast hi: iks'pensw , bat 
they look as if they might have been bought at one 
dei Ink az if dei mail hav bi:n ba:t at wxn 
of those stores where nothing costs more than sixpence,” 
av douz sto:z hwea nApirj kasts ma: dan sites pans/' 
Marshall replied. 
ma:fal ri l plaid. 
“Well, shall we ask if the girls would care to dance 
“wel, fal 7 vi: a:sk if da ga:\z wad kra ta dams 
with us? We had better go one at a time — you first! 
wid as? wi: had beta gou i vah at a taim — jn: fa:st! 
Which of them have you thought of asking?” Storm 
hwitf av dam hav ju: pa:t av a:skifj?” sta:m 
wanted to know. “The smaller one. But I don*t want 
wanlid ta non. “da sma:Ia WAn. bat ai donut want 
to go first,” Marshall replied. “Well, if I’m to go first, 
ta goU fa:st 9i ma:fal rVplaid. “%vel, if aim ta gou fa:st, 
I shall ask the small one,” Storm laughed. “I liked 
ai fal a:sk da sma:l wau stami la:ft. “ai laikt 
the way she moved in time to the music.” 
da wei fi: mu:vd in taim ta da mju:zik” 
586 
The Fifty-Third (53rd) Chapter. 
“So did I. However, I’d rather not go first; but if they 
“sou did ai. han'eva, aid ra:do not gou fa:st; bat if del 
care to have more than one dance with us, perhaps 
kea to hcev mo: dan wah da:ns wid as, pa'keeps 
I might have a chance later of trying how well she 
ai wait hav a tfa:ns leitar av tram] hau wel fi: 
dances. All right, run along now,” Marshall said, “and 
darnsiz. o:l rait, yah a'hy nan/* ma:fal sed, “an 
don’t forget to bow to grandpa and ask him first if 
donut fa'get ta ban ta grernpa: and a:sk him fa:st if 
you may dance with one of his young ladies!” 
ju: mei da:ns wid 7Vaii av biz jAij leidiz” 
Storm collected all his courage and walked up to the 
sto:m ka'lektid o:l biz kArid3 and wo:kt \p ta da 
table where the two girls were sitting. As he came 
teibl hwea da tu: ga:lz wa: sitiy. az hi: keim 
nearer, he noticed that the taller of the girls looked 
niara, hi: non fist dot da to:lar av da ga:lz lukt 
a little like Marion, and so at the last minute he decided 
a litl laik nicer ion, and sou at da Ia:st minit hi: di'said id 
to ask her. First he bowed once in the general direction 
tu a:sk ha:. fa:st hi: baud waiis in da dynaral di'rckjan 
of their table, then he bowed to the old gentleman, 
av dea teibl, den hi: baud ta di ould d^entlman, 
and at last he bowed to the girl and asked in a voice 
and at la:st hi: baud ta da ga:l and a:skt in a vois 
that he hardly recognized as his own, “May I have the 
dat hi: ha:dli rekagnaizd az hiz oun, “mei ai heev da 
grandpa = 
grandfather 
587 
Chapter Fifty-Three (53). 
pleasure of having this dance with you?” 
ple$ar av hceviy dis dams wid ju 
Soon they were all talking pleasantly together, and 
sum dei wd:r o:l to:kiy plezntli ta'gedd, and 
after the first few dances the old gentleman invited 
a:ftd dd fa:st fju: damsis di otild d^entlman in'vaitid 
them to move over to his table. 
dam td mu:v ouva to hie tcihl . 
On Sunday evening the two friends went home by 
on sAndi i:vniy dd tu: frends went houm hai 
train after having spent a very pleasant week-end at 
trein a:fta hceviy spent d veri plesnt { 2vi:k'end at 
the seaside. 
da 'si:'said. 
WORDS: 
grace 
week-end 
tooth 
teeth 
brush 
brush (verb) 
tooth-paste 
tooth-brush 
comb 
sponge 
EXERCISE A. 
Storm — to see the spring in England. Marshall and 
Storm went to Brighton for the —. Brighton is a town 
on the south — of England. A — is used to — your 
teeth with. In the morning, when brushing his —, 
Storm had noticed that he had used up all his —. A — 
is used to brush your hair with, and a — is also used 
for the hair. 
The two friends wanted to bathe, so Marshall took 
his — with him and Storm his —. The — from London 
588 
The Fifty-Third (53rd) Chapter. 
to Brighton is about fifty miles. In former times the — 
made corn into —, but now the factories do it. When 
the ground has been broken by the —, the — is put 
into it. The corn is taken to the — to be made into 
flour. At the hotel Marshall and Storm took their tea 
with —. Marshall took three — of sugar. 
After tea Marshall wanted to show Storm the dif¬ 
ferent — of the town. The — at Brighton consisted of 
small stones, which many people prefer to —. Marshall 
knew a place with — sand. Both ‘beach’ and ‘’ 
mean land at the edge of a sea. Storm knew all about 
boats with —. 
EXERCISE B. 
Write about one of the latest books you have read. 
Was it about a subject you are interested in, or was 
it just a good story? Tell us if you liked it, if you 
know anything about the person who wrote it, etc. 
Use your own words as well as you can when writing 
the exercise, which should have a length of 200—300 
words. 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
Verbs are words that tell us what persons or things 
do or are. They also tell us what happens. Here are 
some examples: The girl goes to school at eight o’clock 
in the morning. The man drove the car. The boy is 
small. The horse was running very fast. I have eaten 
my apple. He could see many houses from his window. 
bathing-drawers 
bathing-costume 
drawers 
distance 
roadside 
seed 
instrument 
plough 
windmill 
left 
mill 
flour 
course 
lemon 
lump 
seaside 
coast 
shore 
beach 
sand 
dance (verb) 
dance 
attraction 
bow 
music 
musical 
time 
up 
cheek 
powder 
jewel 
compare 
moon 
star 
surface 
sail 
smooth 
589 
Chapter Fifty-Three (53). 
grandpa 
What happened then? In these sentences the words 
‘goes 5 , ‘drove’, ‘is’, etc., are verbs. 
A verb has several forms. ‘Write’, ‘wrote’, ‘written’, 
‘writing’, ‘writes’ are all forms of the verb ‘to write’. 
The form ‘to write’ we call the infinitive [ in'finitiv ], and 
this is generally the form we give when we mention 
a verb. Examples: to go, to eat, to swim, to play. 
The form of the verb that expresses the time of the 
sentence we call its tense. The verbs have several 
tenses, which may be seen from the following sentences: 
I am ill now. I was ill yesterday. I have been ill for 
three days. The time “now” is expressed by the present 
tense. Here are some examples of verbs in the present 
tense: I hope to see you again. We think of going there 
often. You never eat enough. We write letters every 
day. 
The forms used in the present tense are the following: 
I call, you call, he (she, it, the boy) calls, we call, you 
call, they (the boys) call. You will notice that the form 
is the same in all cases, except one: after ‘he’, ‘she’, ‘it’, 
and a noun in the singular, an -s is added. 
The -s is pronounced [s] after the sounds p, t, k, f, />, 
which are called voiceless f voislis] consonants, but 
after the sounds b, d, g, m, n , tj, v , d, l, which are called 
voiced [voist] consonants, and after vowels, the -s is 
pronounced [s]. Examples: he thanks \/>(eyks], he brings 
[briyz], he hears f hi as]. 
590 
The Fifty-Third (53rd) Chapter. 
Notice that if the verb ends in the sounds s, s, /, 3, 
a whole syllable [-is J is added: he passes \pa:sis], he 
rises f raisis], he wishes [wifis], he changes [tfeindys]. 
In writing, -es is added in such words if they do not 
end in an -e beforehand: wish-es, rise-s. 
If a verb ends in a consonant followed by -y in the 
infinitive, it changes -y into -ie before -s is added, for 
instance, try — tries. But if a vowel comes before the 
-y, the -y remains when -s is added: stay — stays. 
Questions: 
What are verbs? ... What is the tense of a verb? ... 
How do you make the form of the present tense after 
‘he’, ‘she’, 'it*, or a noun in the singular? ... What do 
you add to a verb in the present tense after ‘he’, ‘she’, 
‘it’, or a singular noun, if it ends in s, s, /, 3? ... If a verb 
ends in -y in the infinitive, do you always change it 
into -ie before -s is added? ... 
591 
Chapter Fifty-Four (54). 
The Fifty-Fourth (54th) Chapter. 
RAILWAYS 
“Really, Marshall, 55 Storm said, when they were 
“riali, ma:fal/ y sto:w sed, hwen dei wo: 
discussing their trip to Brighton over a quiet cup of 
dis'kAsiy dra trip td braitn ouvar a kwaidt k\p av 
tea on Sunday night, “I must say a few words in praise 
ti: on SAndi naif, “ai most sei o fju: wa:dz in preiz 
of your railways. Not only was our train extremely 
dv jo: reilweiz. not ounli waz ana trein iks'tri:n\li 
comfortable, but I was surprised to find how fast it 
kAmfatabl, bat ai waz sa'praizd ta faind halt fa:st it 
went. The journey home from Brighton was very 
ivent. da d$a:ni hourn fram braitn waz veri 
quick indeed.” 
kwik iridi'.d” 
“Yes, we*re rather proud of our railways. Most people 
“jes, wia ra:da proud av ana reilweiz. tnoust pi:pi 
who come to Britain from the Continent have nothing 
hu: Jcaih ta britan fram da kontinant hav nApiy 
but praise for our trains. The reason why our railways 
bat preiz far ana treinz. da ri:zn hwai aua reilweiz 
are better than those of most other countries many 
a: beta dan donz av moust \da kAfitriz ineni 
think is this: In most countries the railways have 
piyk iz dis: in moust kAntriz da reilweiz hav 
592 
The Fifty-Fourth (54th) Chapter. 
always been owned by the State, but over here they 
j:lwdz bi:n ound bat dd steit, bdt ouvd hid dei 
were under the control of four big private companies 
wd:r Afidd dd kdritroul dv fo: big praivit kAMpdniz 
until the first of January 1948. Where the 
An'til dd fd:st dv d^cenjudri nainti:n fj'.tieit. hwed dd 
State owns the railways, there’s no competition, and 
steit ounz dd reilweiz, ddz nou kompi'tijdn, dn 
that often means, they say, that nobody takes any real 
dcct o:fn mi:nz , dei sei, ddt noubddi teiks eni ridl 
trouble to make a first-class business out of them. This 
tiwbl td meik d fd:stkla:s biznis ant dv ddm. dis 
usually means, of course, that railways owned by the State 
jicyidli mints, dv kj:s, ddt reilweiz ound bai dd steit 
don’t make money, but lose money instead. Although 
dount meik m\ni, bdt lu:z iliAni in'sted. o:l'dou 
our railways are now owned by the State, you must 
c ntd reilweiz a: nan ound bai dd steit, jtt: mdst 
remember that they had been made into a first-class 
ri'membd ddt dei hdd bi:n meid intn d fd:stkla:s 
business by the people who owned them before.” 
biznis bai dd pi: pi hu: ound ddm bifo:” 
Storm: “Yes, I can easily understand that there must 
sto:m: “jes, ai kdn i:zili \ndd'stand ddt ded mdst 
have been much competition between the four com- 
hdv bi:n inAtf kjmpi'tifdn bi'twi:n dd fo: kwin- 
panies, and-1 also understand that this may have been 
pdniZj dnd ai j:Isou And d'stand ddt dis mei hdv him 
company = busi¬ 
ness into which 
many people have 
put money 
make money = 
earn money 
He loses, he lost, 
he has lost [lu:ziz, 
lost, lost]. 
593 
Chapter Fifty-Four (54). 
benefit = advan 
tage 
in the way of = 
as to 
a benefit to the people who used the trains. Each 
3 benifit td dd pi:pi hu: ju:zd dd trains. i:tf 
of the companies, of course, wanted to get as much 
dv dd kAmpdnis , ov ko:s, wont-id td get oz niAtf 
of the transport as possible. Their accounts had to 
dv dd trecnspo:t dz posobl. dear o'kaunts heed td 
show a profit at the end of the year. If they lost 
jou 3 profit dt di end ov do jio. if dei lost 
business, they lost money, and if they lost too much 
biznis, dei lost ntAni , ond if dei lost tit: m\tj 
money, their accounts would show a loss instead of 
ntAni, dedr d x kaunts wod jou d los in'sted ov 
a profit; then people wouldn’t put their money into 
d profit; den pi:pl wudnt put deo itiAiii into 
that company, and it would soon be finished. But 
deet kAinpdni, ond it wod su:n bi: finift. bot 
tell me, what could they really do in the way of com- 
tel mi:, hwot hud dei rioli du: in dd wei dv horn - 
petition? It isn’t always that competition is good.” 
pi l tifdn? it iznt o:hvdz ddt kompi'tifon iz gild” 
“Oh, there were, and still are of course, many forms 
“on, ded wo:, on stil a:r dv ko:s, meni fo:mz 
of service to be found in our trains. We really feel 
dv so:vis td bi: faund in auo treinz. wi: ridli fi:l 
that somebody is always thinking out new comforts 
ddt SAinbddi iz o:lwdz pitjkiy out nju: kAmfdts 
for the travellers. In almost all carriages we have 
fd dd trecvldz. in o:lmoust o:l keerid^iz wi: hdv 
594 
The Fifty-Fourth (54th) Chapter. 
soft seats to sit on, instead of hard seats of wood. At 
soft si:ts ta sit on, in'sted av ha:d si:ts av wud. dt 
many stations we can buy a cup of tea, take it along 
meni steijdnz wi: kan bai a k\p av titeik it a'hy 
in the train, and leave the empty cup at another station. 
in da train, an li:v di cmti k\p at a'nAda steijan. 
In one or two trains running between London and 
in WAn a tu: trains rAtiiy bi'turi:n Lxndan an 
Brighton, they have special carriages with typewriters 
braitn, dei hav spejal kcerid^iz wid taipraitaz 
for business men and their secretaries.” 
fa biznis men an da a sekratriz” 
“I see that your railways differ very much from those 
“cli si: dat jo: reilweiz difa veri niAtf fram douz 
in my country,” Storm said. “At home, there is, for 
in mai kAntri,” sta:m sad. “at honm, dar iz, far 
instance, a great difference between first and third 
instans, a grait difrans bi'tzvi:n fa:st an pa:d 
class carriages. The first class carriages, of course, 
kla:s kceridyz. da fa:st kla:s karidyz, av ko:s, 
have soft seats, but many third class carriages still 
hav soft si:ts, bat mani pa:d klcr.s kceridyz stil 
have hard wooden seats. And typewriters! I’m sure 
hav ha:d witdn si:ts. an taipraitaz! aim fua 
nobody ever thought of having typewriters for business 
noubadi eva pa:t av Juuvig taipraitaz fa biznis 
wood = what 
chairs and tables 
are made of 
typewriter 
wooden = made 
of wood 
men in our trains.” 
men in aua treinz” 
595 
Chapter Fifty-Four (54). 
“There’s another difference which I’m almost sure you 
(< baz a'nxba difrans hwitf aim o.’lmoust fud ju: 
have noticed,” Marshall said. “Our carriages are a 
hav noutist” ma:fal sed. “aua kceridyz a:r a 
little narrower than those used on the Continent, 
litl nceroua dan Sous ju:zd on da kontinant, 
although the space between the rails isn’t narrower. 
o:Vdou da speis bi'twi:n da reilz iznt nceroua. 
With narrower carriages running on the rails, it means 
wid nceroua kceridyz rAnirj on da reilz, it mi:nz 
that trains can go much faster. You will remember 
dat treinz kan gou mAtf fa:sta. ju: wil ri'memba 
that we Englishmen built the first railways. That is 
dat wi: iyglijman bilt da fa:st reilweiz. dcet iz 
to say, already more than two thousand years ago the 
ta sei, o.Vredi mo: dan tu: pauzand jiaz a'gou da 
Romans knew how to use rails of stone or wood for 
roumanz nju: hau ta ju:z reilz av stoun o: wud fa 
the transport of heavy objects. But it was in England 
da trcenspo. t av hcvi obdykts. bat it waz in iy gland 
that the first modern railway was opened, with a real 
dat da fa:st mod an reilwci waz oupand, zvid a rial 
engine that was moved forward by steam. At first 
endyn dat waz mu:vd fo:wad bai sti:m. at fa:st 
people were afraid of these engines with steam coming 
pi:pi wa:r a'frcid av di:z endynz zvid sti:m k\miy 
out of them. They thought that the engines weren’t 
aut av dam. dei po:t dat di endynz wa:nt 
596 
The Fifty-Fourth (54th) Chapter. 
safe and dared not ride in trains pulled by engines. 
seif an dead not raid in treinz puld bai endynz. 
So not until the engines had been used for some time 
sou not An'til di endynz had bi:n ju:zd fa s\m taini 
for the transport of goods, did people believe that they 
fo da trmispo:t av gudz, did pi:pi bi'li:v dat dei 
were quite safe, and that they could ride in the trains 
wo: kzvait seif , an dat dei kad raid in da treinz 
without danger. I think it would be hard to-day to 
wid'aut deind^a. ai piijk it zvad bi: ha:d ta'dei to 
find a person who wouldn't dare to ride in a train.” 
foind o pa:sn Inc zvudnt dea ta raid in a trein” 
“How strange to think that the railways, which have 
“hau streind3 to piijk dot da rcilzveiz, Ivwitf hav 
been of such benefit to people, were so long in having 
hi: 11 ov s.\tf bcnifit ta pi:pi, zva: sou lorj in hcevirj 
success!” Storm said. “Just think how travelling, a 
sak'ses!” sto:m sed. “d^Ast piijk hau trcevliy, a 
little over a hundred years ago, differed from travelling 
litl onvor o hAiidrad jioz a'gon, difad fram trcevliy 
to-day! A two hours' trip to-day would have been 
ta'dei! o tic anoz trip ta'dei zvad hav bi:n 
a two days' journey then — a very uncomfortable 
o tic dcic d 30:111 den — 0 veri ah' k Ain fatabl 
journey, too — and not very safe. Nowadays we sit 
d^o.-iii, tu: — an not veri seif. nauadeiz wi: sit 
at ease on seats as comfortable as our chairs at home. 
ot i:z on si:ts az k\mfatabl az aua tfeaz at houm. 
at ease = com¬ 
fortably 
597 
Chapter Fifty-Four (54). 
restaurant car = 
railway carriage 
used as a restau¬ 
rant 
He flies, he flew, 
he has flown 
[flaiz, flu.:, floun]. 
unknown = not 
known 
‘Cheltenham 
Flyer* = thefastest 
train running 
between London 
and Cheltenham 
‘Flying Scotsman* 
= a well-known 
train running 
between London 
and Edinburgh 
[ edinbor9] 
If we get hungry on the trip, we only have to go into 
if zvi: get JiAijgri on do trip, wi: ounli hcev to gou into 
the restaurant car and order what we want, and then 
do rest or on] ka:r ond o:do Invot zvi: zvont, on den 
sit at ease in soft chairs, watching houses and trees 
sit ot i:z in soft tfeoz, zvotfiy hauziz on tri:z 
fly past the window, while we are waiting for the 
flai pa:st do zzdndou, hzvail zvi: a: weitiy fo do 
food.” 
fu:d” 
“Yes,” replied Marshall, “the railways soon became a 
“jes” ri { plaid ma:fol, “do reilzveiz su:n bi'keim 0 
success, even if the first trains were uncomfortable and 
sok'ses, i:von if do fo:st treinz zvo:r Aii ] k.\infotobI on 
the service now given to passengers was quite unknown 
do so:vis nau gizni to pcesind^oz woz kzvait 'An'noun 
then. The speed of those first trains in comparison 
den. do spi:d ov douz fo:st treinz in kom'pcerisn 
with what people were used to must have given the 
zvid hzvot pi:pi wo: ju:st tu most hov givn do 
first passengers a feeling that they were flying along 
fo:st pcesind^oz 0 fi'.liy dot dei zvo: flaiiy o'loy 
as fast as birds. Speaking of birds and flying, it is said 
oz fa:st oz bo:dz. sp'r.kiy ov bo:dz on flaiiy , it iz sed 
that some of our trains, for instance, the ‘Cheltenham 
dot SAin ov auo treinz, for instons, do *tfeltnom 
Flyer 5 and the ‘Flying Scotsman 5 , two of the fastest 
flaio y on do *flaiiy skotsmon 9 , tu: ov do fa:stist 
598 
The Fifty-Fourth (54th) Chapter. 
trains in the world, when at their greatest speed, really 
treinz in da wa:ld, hwen at dea greitist spi:d, riali 
do go faster than any bird has ever flown. I don’t 
du: gou fa:sta dan eni ba:d haz eva floun. ai dount 
know whether it’s true, though.” 
non hwedar its tru:, don ” 
“I hardly think so. But even without that there are 
“ai ha:dli piyk sou. bat i:van wid'aut dcet dea 
so many things that I must praise,” Storm answered. 
sou meni pifjz dat ai mast preiz,” sta.m a:nsad. 
*Tve noticed, for instance, that there are very fine 
“aiv noutist, far in stans, dat dea veri fain 
connections between most of the larger towns. There 
ka'nekfanz bi'twi:n nioust av da la:d^a taunz . dea 
are connections several times a day from one end of the 
ka'nekfanz scvral taimz a dei fram wah end av da 
country to the other. And the connections from London 
/»wntri ta di Ada. an da ka'nekfanz fram lAndan 
are so frequent that you can go almost anywhere 
a: sou fri:kwant dat ju: kan gou admoust enihwea 
whenever you want to. I’m sorry to say that in my 
hwen 1 eva ju: want tu. aim sari ta set dat in mai 
country this is not always so.” 
kxntri dis iz nat a:lwaz sou ” 
“Perhaps that is why many Londoners are such fre- 
“pa'keeps deet iz hwai meni lAndanaz a: SAtf fri 
quent guests in the country. It’s made easy for them 
kwant gests in da k\ntri. its meid i:zi fd dam 
599 
Chapter Fifty-Four (54). 
to get away,” Marshall replied. “You seem to be made 
ta get a'wei,” ma:jal ri'plaid. “jn: si:m td bi: meid 
of the right material for a true Londoner; I’ve noticed 
dv dd rait ma'tiarial far a tru: l And ana; aiv noutist 
that it’s getting harder and harder to keep you at home 
dab its getiy lia:dar an ha:da ta ki:p ju: at houm 
during the week-ends. You go about in trains as if 
djuariy da 'wi.k'endz. ju: gou a'baut in treinz az if 
you were getting material together for a book about 
ju: wa: getifj ma'tiarial ta'geda far a buk a'baut 
the country round London — or perhaps you just want 
da kAntri raund Undan — a: pa'hceps ju: d$Ast want 
to be sure that the railways will get a nice profit?” 
ta bi: fua dat da reilweiz wil get a nais prafit?” 
“Don’t be foolish, Marshall,” Storm replied. “I’m sorry 
u dount bi: fu:lif . iim.fal” sta:m ri'plaid. “aim sari 
I haven’t told you any more about my trips than I have, 
ai hcevnt tould ju: eni ma:r a'baut mai trips dan ai hcev , 
but I will tell you all about them later on.” “This 
bat ai wil tel ju: a:l a'baut dam leitar an.” c( dis 
sounds very interesting. — And what has come over 
saundz veri intristiy. — an hwat haz kAin ouva 
you, since you suddenly look so serious? Have you 
ju:, sins ju: SAdnli luk sou siarias f hav ju: 
lost all your smiles in the train?” “Please don’t make 
last a:l ja: smailz in da trein?” u pli:z dount meik 
fun of me — I’m really a rather serious young man at 
fAn av mi: — aim riali a ra:da siarias jAy mcen at 
600 
The Fifty-Fourth (54th) Chapter. 
heart!” “So I see. Excuse me, old man! But I'm 
ha:t!” “sou ai si:. iks l kju:z mi:, ould man! bat aim 
sure that yours is not only a case of the loss of a few 
fud ddt jo:z iz not ounli d keis av 3 b hs bv b fju: 
smiles. I wonder if you haven't lost your heart as 
smailz. ai WAndar if ju: hcevnt lost jo: ha:t bz 
well?” Storm: “What do you mean?” “I mean,” 
wel?” sto:m: “hwot du: ju: mi:n?” “ai mi:n/ 9 
Marshall replied, “— no, I shall answer you with another 
ma:fal riplaid, “ — nou, ai fal a:nsa ju: wid a'riAda 
question: Are you alone on your frequent Sunday trips 
kwestjan: a: ju: e'loun on jo: fri:kwant SAndi trips 
into the country?” “Hem — I'm not quite ready to tell 
intd da kAntri?” “hm — aim not kwait redi ta tel 
you about that yet.” “Oh, sorry! I can wait.” 
ju: a'baut dcet jet ” “ou, sori! ai ken weit” 
EXERCISE A. 
Until the first of January 1948, all the railways in Eng¬ 
land were owned by four — and were not under the — 
of the State. The English railways are of great — to 
the passengers. The passengers sit on — seats, instead 
of hard seats made of —. Most railways owned by the 
State show a — when the accounts are made up at the 
end of the year, while the private railway companies 
generally show a —. 
WORDS: 
frequent 
transport 
safe 
dare 
steam 
engine 
success 
journey 
601 
Chapter Fifty-Four (54). 
uncomfortable 
restaurant car 
unknown 
fly 
flew 
flown 
flyer 
wood 
wooden 
soft 
difference 
differ 
benefit 
control 
lose 
lost 
loss 
profit 
company 
connection 
competition 
rail 
service 
ease 
praise 
praise (verb) 
material 
typewriter 
Storm told Marshall that the railways in his country 
in many ways — from the railways in Britain. They 
did not give the passengers such good —. The — be¬ 
tween the first and third class carriages was very great. 
Nowadays you can sit at — in the restaurant — and 
have your dinner while you are travelling. They say 
that the train called the ‘Cheltenham —’ runs faster 
than any bird has ever —. In one or two trains running 
between London and Brighton, they have — for business 
men. Storm — the English railways, and Marshall 
answered that most foreigners had only words of — 
for them. 
Although the British carriages are narrower, the space 
between the — in England is the same as on the Con¬ 
tinent. When the first railways were built, modern 
comforts on the trains were quite —. Before the rail¬ 
ways came, a trip which now is made in a few hours 
was often a — of several days. It is the — that pulls 
the train. Most engines are driven by —. At first 
people thought that the trains were not —, and there¬ 
fore they — not ride in them, but used them only for 
the — of goods. Now, however, they have had great 
— everywhere. There are Very good — between all the 
larger towns in England. Storm had made — trips into 
the country during the last months. When Storm 
answered Marshall in a serious voice, Marshall asked 
him if he had — all his smiles in the train. 
602 
The Fifty-Fourth (54th) Chapter. 
EXERCISE B. 
Answer these questions with full sentences: 
Which do you think is the cheaper way of transport of 
goods, by ship or by train? ... Are all the railways in 
your country owned by the State? ... What service do 
your trains give to the passengers? ... Have you got 
trains that have names, as some trains have in England? 
... Do railways in your country show a profit or a loss? 
... Why do you think this is so? ... Which way of 
travelling do you prefer, by train or by boat? ... 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
The present tense of the verb ‘have’ is not made in the 
normal way after ‘he’, ‘she’, ‘it’, or a noun in the 
singular. The form is ‘has’: I have, you have, he (she, 
it, the boy) has, we have, you have, they (the boys) 
have. In the same way, the present tense of the verb 
‘do’ is irregular [i'regjuh], that is, not normal, after ‘he’, 
‘she’, ‘it’, or a noun in the singular: I do [dw:], you do, 
he (she, it, the boy) does [<Iaz] , we do, you do, they (the 
boys) do. Verbs ending in -o add -es after ‘he’, ‘she’, ‘it’, 
or a noun in the singular. Example: I go, he goes. 
The verbs ‘shall’, ‘will’, ‘can’, ‘may’, ‘must’, ‘ought’ do 
not add an -s when used with ‘he’, ‘she’, ‘it’, or a noun 
in the singular, and have consequently only one form 
in the present tense. Examples: He will do it. John 
must not go to school to-day. He can pay the bill. She 
may come at any time. 
603 
Chapter Fifty-Four (54). 
‘Dare’ and ‘need’ may be without -s after ‘he’, ‘she’, ‘it’, 
or a noun in the singular, if they are followed by an 
infinitive. Examples: He needs the money. He need 
not go there. Let him come if he dares. He dare not 
go there. 
The present tense of the verb ‘be’ has three different 
forms: I am, you are, he (she, it, the boy) is, we are, 
you are, they (the boys) are. 
Questions: 
What is the present tense form of ‘have’ after ‘he’, ‘she’, 
‘it’, or a noun in the singular? ... What is the present 
tense of ‘do’ after ‘he’, ‘she*, ‘it’, or a noun in the 
singular, and how is the form pronounced? ... What 
do verbs ending in -o add in the present tense after 
‘he’, ‘she’, ‘it’, or a noun in the singular? ... Mention 
the six verbs which do not end in -s after ‘he*, ‘she*, ‘it’, 
or a noun in the singular.... What are the present tense 
forms of the verb ‘be’? ... 
604 
Chapter Fifty-Five (55). 
The Fifty-Fifth (55th) Chapter. 
AN IMPORTANT QUESTION 
Storm's special work for Mr. Edwards made it necessary 
sta.mz spejdl zva:k fa mistar edwadz meid it nesisari 
for him to spend many evenings at the manager's house. 
fa him ta spend meni i:vniyz at da mcenid^az haus. 
When work was finished on these nights, Mrs. Edwards 
hwen wa:k zvaz finift an di:z units misiz edzvadz 
and Marion usually laid the tea-table, and they all had 
and mcerian jn.^uali leid da ti:teibl, and dei a:l heed 
a cup of tea together. 
a kxp av ti: ta'geda. 
In this way it was not long before the two young people 
in dis zvei it zvaz not lay bi'fa: da tu: j\y pi:pi 
had become great friends. They went about together 
had bi'kAm greit frendz. dei zvent a'bciut ta'geda 
quite a lot, to restaurants now and then, to see a picture, 
kzvait a lat, ta restar a :yz nau and den, ta si: a piktfa, 
or on small trips to places outside London. 
a:r an sma:l trips ta pleisiz nut said l And an. 
On the Sunday following the trip to Brighton, Marion 
an da SAndi falouiy da trip ta braitn, mcerian 
had agreed to go with Storm to spend a day in the 
had a'gri:d ta gou zvid sta:ni ta spend a dei in da 
hills south of London. London itself is mostly built 
hilz saup av Undan. Lmdan it'self iz moustli bilt 
605 
Chapter Fifty-Five (55). 
since (here) 
= because 
curve = bend 
on very flat ground, but a short distance to the south 
on veri fleet graund, bdt d fo:t distdns ta da saup 
of the city there are high hills, from which there is 
av da siti dear a: hai hits, fram hwitf dear is 
a very beautiful view of London and the country round 
a veri bju. taful vju: av Undan and da kAntri raund 
it. The highest of the hills is called Leith Hill; that 
it. da haiist av da hilz is ko:ld li:p hil; deet 
was where they were going that day, since Storm had 
zvas hzvea dei wa: gouiy deet dei, sins sto:m had 
not been there yet. “I’m looking forward to getting 
not bi:n dea jet. “aim lukiy fo:zvad ta getiy 
up into the hills,” Storm said as they sat in the bus. 
Ap into da hilz” sto.m sed as dei seet in da b.\s. 
“I don't find flat country very interesting — the same 
“ai dount faind fleet kAntri veri intristiy — da seim 
wherever you look. In the hills, on the other hand, 
hzvear'eva ju: Ink. in da hilz, on di Ada heend, 
the country changes all the time, and there's always 
da kAntri tfeindyz o:l da taim, an das o:lzvas 
something new to be seen. Hallo! What was that?” 
SAinpiy — nju: ta bi: si:n. ha'lou! hzvot zvas deet?” 
he suddenly cried out, as the bus threw them over to 
hi: sAdnli krciid ciut, as da bAS pru: dam onva ta 
one side and then stopped. They had just come round 
zvaji said and den stopt. dei had d^Ast kAm raund 
a curve in the road and had nearly run into an old 
a ka:v in da roud and had niali rAti intu an ould 
606 
The Fifty-Fifth (55th) Chapter. 
car that was standing in the road. “That was a near 
ka: ddt zvdz stccndiy in dd road. “dcet Wdz d nid 
thing,” Marion said. “If the driver hadn’t been so 
/>*//,” mceridn sed. “if dd draivd hcednt bi:n sou 
quick in using the brakes and stopping the bus, there 
kwik in ju:ziy dd breiks dn stopiy dd bAs, df.d 
would no doubt have been an accident. Look at the 
zvdd non dant hdv bi:n dn ceksiddnt. Ink dt dd 
cloud of dust that the wheels made!” 
klaud dv d\st ddt dd hwi: Iz meid!” 
“This is one of the new buses with brakes both on the 
“dis iz w\n dv dd nju: bAsiz wid breiks boup on dd 
front wheels and on the back wheels; that’s why she she — the bus 
fr\nt hwi:Iz dnd jn dd back 1nvi:lz; dcets Invar ji: 
was able to stop so quickly when I put the brakes on,” 
zvdz eibl td stop sou kwikli hwen ai put dd breiks on” 
the driver said proudly, as he started the bus again. 
d? draiz'd sed praudli, dz hi: sta.tid dd bAS d'gein. 
“If it had been one of the old ones,” he continued, 
“if it hdd bi:n zvah dv di ould zvahz,” hi: kdn'tinju:d, 
“I’m afraid we should now all have been lying in the 
“aim d'frcid zvi: fdd nan j: 1 hdv bi:n laiiy in dd 
dirty water in the ditch at the side of the road — bus, 
dd:ti wj:tdr in dd ditf dt dd said dv dd roud — bAS, 
passengers, car, and all, and this just because some 
pcesind^dz, ka:, dnd j: 1, dn dis d$Ast bi'koz saih 
farmer leaves his car in such a foolish place as a curve 
fa:md li:vz hiz ka:r in sAtf d ficlif pleis dz d kd:v 
15 . 2 
607 
Chapter Fifty-Five (55). 
in the road! Well, I’ve never run my bus into the 
in da road! wel, aiv nevd rxn mat bxs inla dd 
certain = sure 
ditch yet, and if I can help it, I never shall!” “I’m 
ditf jet, and if ai kan help it,ai nevd feel!” “aim 
quite certain he never will,” Storm said to Marion; 
kwait sa:tn hi: neva wil” storm sed ta nice ri an; 
“he seems to be an extremely clever driver.” 
“hi: si:mz ta bi: an iks'trinuli kleva draiva” 
“Well, this seems to be where we’re to get off,” Storm 
“zvel, dis si: m2 ta bi: hive a wia ta get a:f” sta:m 
said a few minutes later, as the bus stopped at the 
sed a fju: minits leita, az da b\s stapt at da 
bottom of a hill. “Yes, this is Leith Hill,” Marion 
batam av a hil. “jes, dis iz li:p hil /’ mcerian 
replied. “Can you see the tower at the top of the hill? 
ri\plaid, “kan ju: si: da tauar at da tap av da hil: 
The hill isn’t quite 1,000 feet high, but now that 
da hil iznt kwait a pauzand fi:t hai, bat nau dat 
the tower has been built, it may be said with some 
da tana haz bi:n bilt, it mei bi: sed wid s.\in 
truth that it is 1,000 feet from the bottom of the 
tru:p dat it iz a pauzand fi:t fram da batam av da 
hill to the top. — It is certainly good to walk about 
hil ta da tap. — it iz sa:tnli gad ta wa:k a'baut 
a bit after sitting in the bus for so long,” Marion 
a bit a:fta sitiy in da bxs fa sou lay,” mcerian 
continued, as she got out of the bus. “And now I 
kantinju.d, az fi. gjt aut av da bxs. “an nau ai 
608 
The Fifty-Fifth (55th) Chapter. 
suggest that first of all we walk over to that farm and 
sa'd^est ddt fa:st av a:l wi: wa:k ouva ta dcct fa:m an 
have a cup of tea to wash away the dust from our 
hcev a k\p av ti: ta zvaf a'wei da dAst fram ciua 
throats before we start on our walk. It hasn’t rained 
prouts hi'fa: zvi: sta:t an aua wa:k. it hceznt reind 
for two weeks, so there must have been at least an 
fa tu: wi:ks, sou Sea mast hav bi:n at li:st an 
inch of dust on the road for the wheels of the bus to 
inf av dAst an da roud fa da hwi:lz av da bAS ta 
send flying in clouds.” “Did you say tea at the farm?” 
send flaiiy in klaudz” “did ju: sei ti: at da fa:m?” 
Storm asked. “Yes, in many places in the country 
sta.ni a:skt. “jes, in meni pleisiz in da kAntri 
where tourists come,” she answered, “the farmers’ wives 
him: a tuarists k\ m,” fi: a:nsad, “da fa:maz waivz 
serve tea with home-made bread and cake, and they 
sa:v ti: wid hoummeid bred an keik, an dei 
do so here, too.” 
du: sou hia } tu:.” 
The farm-house was a long, low building made of red 
da 'fa:m [ haus waz a lay, lou bildiy meid av red 
brick. At one side there was a building for the animals, 
brik. at waii said dea waz a bildiy fa di cenimalz, 
also of red brick, and at the other side was a nice 
a:lsou av red brik, and at di Ada said waz a nais 
garden, surrounded by a wooden fence, where tea was 
ga:dn, sa'raundid bai a wudn fens , hwea ti: waz 
609 
Chapter Fifty-Five (55). 
served. “I wonder where the gate is in this fence?” 
sa:vd. “ai WAndd hwra da geit is in dis fens?” 
Marion said, as they walked along the side of the 
mcerian sed, as dei wo:kt a'loy da said av da 
garden towards the house. “There must be some way 
ga.dn ta'wo.ds da haus. (( dea niASt bi: s\m wei 
of getting into the garden.” 
av getiy inta da ga:dn” 
Not until they came all the way up to the farm-house, 
not An'til dei keim o:l da wei Ap ta da ‘ fa:m l haus, 
did they find the gate. Just as they were going to 
did dei faind da geit. d$Ast as dei wa: gouitj tu 
open it, the farmer's wife came out with a basket full 
oupan it, da fa.maz waif keim aut wid a ba.skit ful 
of corn and started feeding the corn to the fowls 
av ko:n and sta.tid fi:diy da ko:n ta da faulz 
running about in front of the house. When she called, 
rAniy a'baut in frAnt av da haus. hwen fi: ko:ld, 
they hurried up to her as fast as their legs and their 
dei hArid Ap ta ha: az fa:st az dea leg jr and dea 
wings would carry them. One little brown hen 
wiyz wad kceri dam. zvau litl braun hen 
especially seemed to be very hungry; it tried to fly 
is'pefali si:md ta bi: vert hAygri; it traid ta flai 
up to the basket to get as near to the corn as possible. 
A P td &a ba.skit ta get as nia ta da ko:n az posabl. 
There were several kinds of fowls, and among them 
dea wa. sevral kaindz av faulz, and am Ay dam 
610 
The Fifty-Fifth (55th) Chapter. 
they also saw a turkey. “Look at that funny fellow 
dei jilsou so: a ta:ki. “Ink at beet f.xni felou 
over there,” Marion said. “He looks as if he owned 
ouva bed,” mcerian sed. “hi: Inks az if hi: ound 
the whole place — so proud. And then he's going 
da houl pleis — sou praud. an den hi:z gouiy 
to end his life on somebody's Christmas table, no doubt. 
tu end his laif an s\mbadis krismas teibl, nou daut. 
Listen to the strange noise he's making. Isn't he funny? 
lisn ta da streind 3 noiz hi:s meikiy. isnt hi: fxnif 
I must always laugh when I see turkeys; they look 
ai mast o:lwaz la:f hwen ai si: ta.kiz; dei luk 
so much like little old, foolish, proud men.” 
sou niAtf laik litl ould, fu:lif, praud men.” 
“Good afternoon,” she said to the farmer’s wife, who 
“gud x a:fta x nu:n” fi: sed ta da fa:maz waif, hu: 
had now finished feeding the fowls. “Could you make 
had nan finift fi:diy da faiilz. “had ju: meik 
us a cup of tea?” “Yes, certainly,” the woman 
as a k\p av ti“jes . sa.tnli” da wuman 
answered. “If you'll go into the garden and wait, it 
a:usad. “if ju:l gou inta da ga:dn an zveit, it 
will be ready in a few minutes.” “Fine! But might 
zvil hi: rcdi in a fju: minits” “fain! bat mait 
I look about a bit while we’re waiting?” Storm asked. 
ai Ink a'baiit a bit hzmil zvia weitiy?” sto:m a:skt. 
“You see, I’ve never visited an English farm before, 
‘ju: si:, aiv neva visitid an iyglif fa:m bi'fj:, 
611 
Chapter Fifty-Five (55). 
and I’m interested in seeing whether there’s much 
and aim intristid in si:irj hwedd daz mAtf 
difference between your farms and the farms of the 
difrdns bi'twi:n jo: fa:mz on 3d fa:mz av 3a 
country that I come from.” “Certainly! Look about 
kxntri Sat ai k\m from ” (( sa:tnli! Ink a'baut 
as much as you like. But be careful when you go over 
az mAtj az ju: laik. bat bi: keaful hwen ju: gou ouva 
Pty 
to the animals, for we’ve got a young pig running 
ta 3i animate, fa wi:v got a jAtj pig rAniy 
about loose, and he might brush against your clothes. 
a'baut lu:s, an hi: mait brAf a'geinst jo: kloudz. 
Pigs, you know, aren’t always so clean. He really 
pigz, ju: non, a:nt o:lwaz sou kli:n. hi: riali 
shouldn’t be loose any longer, but ought to be shut 
fudnt bi: lu:s eni loyga, bat o:t ta bi: jAt 
fat = the opposite 
of thin 
up with the other pigs — you can see the five fat pigs 
Ap wid 3i ASa pigz — ju: kan si: 3a faiv fat pigz 
in there. He runs about so much that he doesn’t grow 
in dsa. hi: rAnz a'baut sou mAtj Sat hi: dAznt grou 
fat like the others. He’s such a funny littlje pig, putting 
fat laik 3i Adaz. hi:z SAtf a fAni litl pig , putiy 
his nose into everything to see what it is, and the 
hiz nouz intu evripiy ta si: hwot it iz , an da 
children have such a good time playing with him that 
tfildran hav SAtf a gud taim pleiiy wiS him dat 
my husband hasn’t had the heart to shut him up with 
mai hAzband haznt had da ha:t ta fAt him Ap wid 
612 
The Fifty-Fifth (55th) Chapter. 
the others yet. But you can see for yourselves that 
di Adaz jet. bat ju: kan si: fa ja:'selvz dat 
he’s much too thin; by now, he ought to be almost 
hi:z niAtf tu: pin; bai nau, hi: o:t ta bi: adrnoust 
twice as fat! Well,” she continued, picking up two 
twais az feet! ivel” fi: karitinju:d, pikiy a p tu: 
empty buckets that were standing outside the kitchen 
emti bAkits dat wa: stcendiy autsaid da kit jin 
door, “I’d better go to the pump now and get the 
da:, “aid beta gou ta da pAinp nau an get da 
water for your tea.” 
K'j.ta fa jo: ti:” 
“Aren’t the buckets heavy for you to carry?” Marion 
“a: nt da bAkits Jievi fa ju: ta kceri?” mcerian 
asked. “No, that’s nothing to speak of. But in my 
a:skt. “non, deets nApiy ta spi:k ov. bat in mai 
grandmother’s time the work of a farmer’s wife was 
grcendniidaz taim da wa:k av a fa:maz waif waz 
hard. They didn’t have a pump at the farm then, 
haul. dei didnt luev a pAmp at da fa:m den, 
but had to walk quite a long distance to a small 
bat heed ta zaa:k kwait a lay distans tu a sma:l 
brook to get water. Of course, the water in a brook 
bruk ta get wa:ta. av ka:s, da wa:tar in a bruk 
coming down from the hills is always very fine, but 
kAtniy daun fram da hilz iz a.lwaz veri fain, bat 
it really was too far to go to get water. If you’re 
it riali waz tu: fa: ta gou ta get wa:ta. if jua 
pump 
613 
Chapter Fifty-Five (55). 
around = about 
a bit "= a short 
time 
oak 
He spreads, he 
spread, he has 
spread \sfirni.::, 
■V 'red, sprat j. 
614 
going up Leith Hill, you will cross the brook on your 
gouty .\p l!:p hip ju: wil kras da bruk an ja: 
way up. The path from here to the top of the hill 
wei Ap. da pa:p fram hi a ta da tap av da hil 
passes the brook at a place where the brook is so 
pa:siz da bruk at a plcis hwea da bruk iz sou 
narrow that you can cross it in one step.” “Isn’t 
nccrou dat ju: kan hr as it in wah step” (C iznt 
there a road up the hill from the main road?” Storm 
dar o roud Ap da hil fram da mein roud?” sta:m 
asked. “Yes,” she answered, “but you had better go 
a:skt. “jcs” Ji: cr.nsad, “bat ju: had beta gou 
by the path through the wood. It’s a much nicer 
bai da pa:p pru: da wud. its a niAtf rniisa 
way and not so full of dust as the road.” After 
wei an nat sou ful av d\st az da roud” a:fta 
having looked around for a bit, Marion and Storm 
Incviy lukt a'round far a bit, mccrian and sta:m 
went into the garden to have their tea. The garden 
went inta da ga:dn ta heev dea ti:. da go:dn 
was small and well kept, with three or four tables 
zcaz sma:l and wet kept, wid pri: a fa: teiblz 
for the guests. They chose a table in the corner, 
fa da gests. dei tfouz a teibl in da ka:tta, 
under a very large old oak tree. ^The old oak spread 
Andar a veri lo:d 3 ould ouk tri:. di ould ouk spred 
its branches far out on all sides and gave a lovely, 
its bra: nfiz fa:r out an a:l suidz and geiv a l.wli. 
The Fifty-Fifth (55th) Chapter. 
cool shade for them to sit in. In the leaves and the 
ku:l feid fa dam ta sit in. in da li:vz and da 
branches above their heads they saw birds busily flying 
bra: n f iz a'b.w dca beds dei sa: ba:dz bizili flaiiij 
in and out, and some of them flew away to return a 
in and aut, and s.\m av darn flu: a'zvei ta ri'ta.n a 
little later with food for their young. 
litl Icita wid fu:u fa dr a 'jaij. 
“Look there, on that branch over there,” Marion said. 
“Ink dr a, an dcct brarnf ouva deaf 3 nucrian sed. 
— “No, not so high up, just above the fence. There’s 
— “non, nat sou hoi \p, d$Ast a'b.w da fens. daz 
a nest there; I wonder if there are young birds in it?” 
a nest dr a; ai \CAiidar if dra j\ij ba:dz in it? 33 
“No, but there’s a bird sitting on eggs, I think,” Storm 
"non. bat daz a haul sitij an egz, ai piyk” stann 
replied. “And that busy little fellow coming now 
ri'plaid. “an d(Ct bizi litl felon kAiniy turn 
seems to be carrying food to her. Listen to him ; 
si:mz ta bi: kceriij fu:d tu ha:. lisn ta him. 
singing out to all the world what a clever fellow he 
siijiij nut tu a:l da 70a:Id Incat a klcva felon hi: 
is!” 
“Do you think that is 
what he’s doing?” 
Marion 
iz!” 
“dit: ju: fijk dcct iz 
Incat hi:z 
diciij?” 
mcerian 
asked. 
“Well, perhaps you’] 
re right. 
Now, I thought 
n:sbt. 
“ivel, pa'beeps jua 
rait. 
nan, ai 
pa:t 
he was being the little gentleman, singing to keep her 
hi: icaz bi:iy da litl dyntlman, siijitj ta ki:p ha: 
ties? 
615 
Chapter Fifty-Five (55). 
company. But, of course, you must have a better 
k .\mp dm. bat, av ka:s, ju: mast hcev a be tar 
understanding of the stronger sex than I. And men 
a nda'stcendiy av da strayga seks dan ai. an men 
do like to talk about themselves.” Here the farmer’s 
du: laik ta ta:k a'baut dam'selvz.” hia da fa:maz 
wife interrupted them, bringing a tray with the tea- 
zvaif int a'r Apt-id dam, briyiy a trei wid da ti:- 
things. She spread a pretty, green-and-brown cloth 
piyz. fi: spred a priti, gri.nandbraun klap 
on the table, put cups, plates, cake, bread-and-butter, 
an da teibl, put k\ps, pleits, keik, bredn'b.xta , 
marmalade, and tea on the table, and then left them 
mannaleid, and ti: an da teibl, and den left dam 
to themselves again. 
ta dam'selvz a'gein. 
“She’s really a pretty woman — to speak of something 
u fi:z riali a priti zoitman — ta spi:k av s.\mpiy 
else,” said Storm, spreading marmalade on a piece of 
els” scd sta:m, sprediy ma.malcid an a pi:s av 
bread. “Don’t you think so?” “Yes, if she wasn’t 
bred. “dount ju: piyk sou/” “jes, if fi: zuaznt 
quite so fat, one might almost call her beautiful,” Marion 
lx'wait sou feet, zo.xn mait a.lmoust ka:l ha: bju.taful,” mcerian 
answered. “But they get too many good things to eat 
a: ns ad. u bat dei get tit: meni gud piyz tu i:t 
here in the country, I suppose. Let’s take a picture 
hiar in da kAntri, ai sa'pouz. lets teik a piktjar 
616 
The Fifty-Fifth (55th) Chapter. 
of her when she comes for her money! 
av ha: hwen ft: k.\mz fa hd: niAni! 
your camera along, didn’t you?” 
ja: kcemara a'lay, didnt ju:?” 
You did bring 
ju: did briij 
“Yes, I’ve got the camera here in my pocket. I’m 
“jes, aiv gat da kcemara hiar in mai pakit. aim 
camera 
going to try to get a picture of one of the bees, too, 
gouiy ta trai ta get a piktfar av w\n av da bi:z, tu:, 
that are flying round these flowers all the time. If 
dat a: flaiiy raund di:z flauaz a:l da taim. if 
I could get very near to a bee, it would make an 
at had get veri nia tu a bi:, it wad meik an 
interesting picture, I think. I’d like one of the bird, 
intristiy piktfa, ai piyk. aid laik wav av da ba:d, 
too, just when he’s spreading his wings to fly. But 
tu:, d^Ast hwen hi:z sprediy Itiz iviyz ta flai. bat 
a picture like that will be hard to get, I’m afraid; they 
a piktfa laik deet wil bi: ha:d ta get, aim a'freid; dei 
move their wings so quickly. — And when we have 
nuev dr.a wiyz sou kwikli. — an hwen wi: hav 
mounted to the top of the hill, I’m going to take a 
mount id ta da tap av da hil , aim gouiy ta teik a 
picture of you, too, with your pretty head against the 
piktfar av ju:, tu:, wid ja: priti hed ageinst da 
blue sky.” 
bin: skai” 
“Don’t be foolish!” Marion laughed. “You had better 
“dount bi: fu:lif!” mcerian la:ft. “ju: had beta 
617 
Chapter Fifty-Five (55). 
take a picture of the river Thames flowing quietly 
teik a piktfar av da viva tcniz flouiy kwaiatli 
towards London down in the bottom of its valley. 
ta'waulz l And an daun in da bat am av its vceli. 
That's something worth seeing. 5 ' “I can see rivers that 
dccts SAinpiy wa:p si:iy” “ai kan si: rivaz dat 
flow through valleys wherever there are hills and rivers 
flou pru: vccliz hwear'eva dea hilz an rivaz 
in the world, but I don't know how often I may see 
in da iva:ld, bat ai daunt non hau a:fn oi mei si: 
your sweet face yet,’ 5 Storm replied. “Don’t say such 
ja: swi:t feis jet” sta:ni ri'plaid. “dount sei sAtj 
things; the farmer’s wife might hear you. Look, she’s 
piyz; da fa:niaz waif mait hid jit:. Ink. fi:z 
laughing at us,” Marion said, trying not to smile. “No, 
la.fiy cet as” nicer ion sed, traiiy not ta stnail. “non, 
she isn’t,” Storm answered, “she’s smiling kindly at us. 
//: iznt” sta:m cr.nsad, (C )i:z smoiliy kaindli cet as. 
‘All the world loves a lover,’ you know. She’s seen 
*a:l da wa:ld Iavz a Lwa jn: non. ji:z si:n 
do try = please try 
long ago how I feel about you. — Now, do try to be 
lay a'gou hau ai fi:l a bant ju:: — nau, du: trai ta bi: 
serious, Marion, just for a few minutes while I tell you 
siarias, nucrian, d$Ast far a fju: ininits hwail ai tel jn: 
about this.” “But I don’t want to be serious now, not 
a'baut dis.” “bat ai dount want ta bi: siarias nan, not 
with people standing about, looking at us, at least,” 
wid pi:pl stcendiy a'baut, lukiy cet as, at li:st” 
618 
The Fifty-Fifth (55th) Chapter. 
Marion cried, jumping up from her chair. “Pm going 
mceridn kraid, d^Ampiy \p fram ha: tfea. “ aim gouiy 
to run all the way to the top of the hill. Catch me 
ta r\n a:l da wei ta da tap av da hil. kcetj mi: 
if you can!” So saying, she ran through the garden 
if ju: keen!” sou seiiy, fi: roan pru: da ga:dn 
gate and started off along the path. Storm had to pay 
geit and sto:tid a:f a'lay da pa:p. sta:m heed ta pei 
for their tea before he could run after her, so when 
fa dca ti: bi'fa: hi: had vah a:fta ha:, sou hwen 
he left the farm, he could no longer see her. “Well, 
Jti: left da fa:in, hi: had non layga si: ha:. “wel, 
she must be somewhere along this path,” he said to 
fi: inAst bi: SAinhwear a'lay dis pa:p,” hi: sed ta 
himself, and started off. He hadn’t walked far, how- 
h ini' self, and sta:tid a:f. hi: hcednt wa.kt fa:, hau- 
ever, before he heard her calling his name. But he 
1 eva . bi'fa: hi: haul ha: ka:liy his neim. bat hi: 
couldn’t see her anywhere. “Where are you?” he called. 
kudnt si: ha:r enihwea. “hwear a: ju:?” hi: ko:ld. 
“Here,” she answered, laughing, and her voice sounded 
"hia,” fi: a:nsad, lo:fiy, and ha: vais saundid 
quite near, although he could still see nothing but trees 
kwait nia, a.l'dou hi: kad stil si: nApiy bat tri:s 
all round. 
a:l round. 
Then he began to look behind trees and up into the 
den hi: bi'gcen ta ink bi'haind tri:s and Ap inta da 
619 
Chapter Fifty-Five (55). 
branches, hoping to find her there. “Call again,” he 
bra.nfis, houpiy ta faind hd: dea. “ko:l a'gein,” hi: 
cried, and this time he could hear that her voice came 
kraid, and dis tciim hi: kad hia dat. ha: vais keim 
from one of the ^>ig old oaks standing by the path. She 
framwAnav da big ould ouks stcendiy bai da pa:p. ji: 
had found a hole in a hollow tree, big enough for her 
had found a houl in a halou tri:, big i'n\f fa ha: 
to get in through. When he found her, he saw that 
ta get in pru:. Jvwen hi: found ha:, hi: sa: dat 
there was almost room enough inside the hollow tree 
dea was admoust ru:m in\f insaid da halou tri: 
for six people, or for two armchairs, as Marion suggested. 
fa siks pi:pi, a: fa tu: 'a:m'tfeas, as mcerian sa'd^estid, 
“But now comes the difficult part of it,” Marion said. 
<( bat nau k\ms da difikalt po:t av it,” mcerian sod. 
“How am I going to get out of here again? When I 
U hau am ai gouiy ta get out av Jiiar a'grin/ hwcn ni 
was standing outside, I could reach a branch above the 
was stcendiy out'said, ai kad ri:tf a bru:nf a'b.w da 
hole, but when I had got in, I found that the bottom 
hotd, bat hwen ai had gat in, ai found dat da bat am 
of the hole inside the tree was deeper than I thought. 
av da houl insaid da tri: ivas di:pa dan ai pa:t. 
I shouldn’t like to get a hole in my new frock, getting 
ai fudnt laik ta get a houl in rnai nju: frak, getiy 
out. Will you help me, please?” she asked. 
aut. wil ju: help mi:, pli:s?” fi: a:skt. 
The Fifty-Fifth (55th) Chapter. 
“Not until you’ve listened to what I want to tell you, 
“nat .\n'til ju:v lisnd td hwjt ai want td tel ju:, 
young lady,” Storm laughed. “Oh, I don’t think you’re 
]\y] leidi” sta:m la:ft. “on, ai donut piyk jud 
nice at all,” Marion said. “In the old days, true gentle- 
nais at a:l,” mcerian sed. “in di ould deiz, tru: d^entl- 
men who were asked to help ladies in danger always 
man ha: zva:r a:skt ta help leidiz in deind^a a:lwaz 
mounted their horses at once and rode off to bring help 
mount-id dca ha:siz at waus an roud a:f ta briy help 
without talking first.” 
zvid'aut ta:kiy fa:st” 
“That’s all very well, but it only takes us away from 
“dcets a:l veri zvel, bat it ounli teiks as a'wei fram 
what we were talking about when you left me so 
Invat wi: zva: tj:kiy a'baut hwen ju: left mi: sou 
suddenly. What was it I was going to say when you 
SAdnli . hwat waz it ai waz gouiy ta sei hwen ju: 
ran off? — Oh, yes, now I know. Will you marry me?” 
rcen o:ff — ou, jes, nan ai non. wil ju: mceri mi:?” 
“Is that your price for helping me out?” Marion asked 
“iz dcet ja: prais fa helpiy mi: aut?” mcerian a:skt 
with a smile. “I’m afraid it is,” he answered very 
zc dd a srnail. “aim a'freid it iz” hi: a: ns ad veri 
seriously. “Oh, well — then I shall have to, I suppose,” 
siariasli . “ou, zvel — den ai fal hcev tu, ai sa'pouz” 
Marion said. With a laugh, he lifted her out of her 
mcerian sed. wid a la:f, hi: lift-id ha:r aut av ha: 
621 
Chapter Fifty-Five (55). 
hollow tree, and arm in arm they continued up the 
halou tri:, and a:ni in a:m dei kan'tinju:d a p da 
hill. A little higher up, they came to the brook that 
Jiil. a lit / haiar Ap, dei keim ta da bruk dat 
the farmer’s wife had spoken of. Here some,of the 
da fa:wac waif had spoukn av. hia saiii av da 
roots of the trees were above the ground, and in some 
ru:ts av da tri:z wa:r a'b.w da ground, and in saiii 
places the water of the brook had washed the earth 
pleisiz da wa:tar av da bruk had waft di a:p 
away round the roots, so that they lay like brown, wet 
a'zvei round da ru:ts, sou dat dci lei laik braun, zvet 
snakes on the ground. “Let me help you to jump 
snciks an da ground. (i let mi: help ju: ta d^.xnip 
across,” Storm said to Marion. “It’s a little wider here 
a'kras,” sta:m sed ta imerian. (i its a litl waida hia 
than I thought, and I'm afraid that your feet will slip 
dan oi pa:t, and aim a'freid dat ja: fi:t wil slip 
on the wet stones.” She took Storm’s hand, and it 
an da zvet stounz” fi: tuk stamiz hand, and it 
was a good thing that she did, for just as she was 
zvaz a gud pig dat fi: did, fa d$Ast az fi: waz 
going to jump, her foot slipped, and she would have 
gouiij ta d^Ainp, ha: fut slipt, and fi: zvad hav 
fallen if he had not supported her. 
fa:ln if hi: had nat sa'pa:tid Jia:. 
At last they reached the top of the hill, where the 
at la:st dei ri.tft da tap av da hil, hzvea da 
622 
The Fifty-Fifth (55th) Chapter. 
tower stood. “Doesn’t it cost anything to go up 
tana stud. “d\snt it hast enip'uj ta you .\p 
there?” Storm asked. “No, it’s quite free,” Marion 
dra?” sta:m a:skt. “non, its kzvait fri:/ 3 mccrian 
answered. “It’s funny — you’re not the first foreigner 
cr.nsad. “its f\ni — jua not da fa:st farina 
I’ve heard ask that question. Does it seem so strange 
aiv ha:d a:sh dcut kwcstfan. d\s it si:m sou streind 3 
to you that it should be free of charge?” “Oh, I 
la ju: dat it fad bi: fri: av tfaid^?” “ou, ai 
don’t know,” he answered. “But you are usually 
daunt non,” hi: cr.nsad. :( bat ju: a: ju.^uali 
surprised, as a tourist, to find something that is free 
sapraizd , az a tuarist, ta faind SAmpiy dat is fri: 
of charge.” 
av tfa:d$” 
“Now, let’s go up,” he continued, mounting the narrow 
“nan. Jets you Ap” hi: kan'tinjir.d, mountiy da ncerou 
stairs of the tower. “Look, out there, at the bottom 
straz av da tana. “Ink\ out dea, at da batam 
of the valley, is the Thames,” Marion said. “It looks 
av da vceli, iz da tcmz” m (Brian scd. “it Inks 
no bigger than a brook from here, so it must be farther 
non biya dan a bruk fram hi a, sou it mast bi: fa:dar 
away than I thought,” Storm replied. “And what is 
a'wci dan ai pa:t,” sta:m ri'plaid. “an Inoat iz 
that white spot over there on the hill — is it a tent, 
dcct Jnoait spat ouva dear an da hit — is it a tent. 
15/3 
623 
Chapter Fifty-Five (55). 
I wonder?” “No, it’s too big for that. I think it is 
ai w\nda?” “non, its tu: big fa dcet. ui piyk it ie 
chalk. Between London and the south coast there are 
tfj:k. bi'tu'i:n l.uidan an da saup koust dea 
many chalk hills. You can see the white chalk hills 
meni tja:k hile. ju: ban si: da hwciit tfj:b hile 
from the boat, when you cross the Channel, coming 
frani da bout, hwen ju: bras da tfcenl, k\mifj 
from France to England. But I think there really is 
fram fra:ns tu iygland. bat ai piyk dea riali ie 
a tent down there, at the foot of the hill.” 
a tent daun dea, at da fut av da hil” 
“What fun those fellows must be having! I’ve often 
“liwat f\n done fclone mast bi: heeviy! arc o:fn 
lived in a tent myself at home, with one or two of my 
livd in a tent inaPself at houm, wid w.ui a tu: av mai 
friends. It’s a fine way to spend your holidays,” 
frende. its a fain wei ta spend jj: lulidie 
Storm said. “Is it?” Marion asked. “It seems to 
sta:m sed. “ie itf” nicerian a:skt. “it si:me ta 
me that it must be a rather cold and wet affair. A 
mi: dat it mast bi: a ra:da kould an wet a'fra. a 
tent is a poor cover when it rains.” “Not if the tent 
tent ie a pua kwa hwen it reined’ “not if da tent 
is made of good canvas,” Storm replied. “Mine is 
ie meid av gud k<znvas,”~^stj:m rP plaid. “main ie 
made of the same kind of canvas as they use for tents 
meid av da senn kaind av kcenvas ae dei ju:e fa tents 
624 
The Fifty-Fifth (55th) Chapter. 
in the army, and I’m sure you couldn’t wish for a 
in di a:mi, dnd aim fua ju: kudnt zvif far a 
better cover against the rain than my tent. I once 
beta kwvar a'geinst da rein dan mai tent. ax zv\ns 
slept in it when it was raining hard; outside, the water 
slept in it hwen it waz reiniy ha:d; 'aut'said, da zvo:ta 
was pouring down on the roof of the tent, but, inside, 
zuaz po:riy daun on da ru:f av da tent, bat, 'in'said, 
it was quite dry.” 
it zvaz kzvait drai” 
“Well, I’m glad I don’t live in a tent, all the same,” 
“zvel, aim glced ai dount liv in a tent, o:l da seim,” 
Marion said. “I hope we shan’t have to live in one 
nuerian sed. “ai houp wi: fa:nt hcev ta liv in w\n 
when we’re married. I’m a great lover of nature, but 
hzven zvia nuerid. aim a greit lAvar av neitja, bat 
I do prefer to be able to return to a house with a 
ai da: pri'fa: ta bi: eibl ta ri'tarn tu a haus zvid a 
kitchen and a bathroom, and with warm and com- 
kitfin and a ba:prum, an zvid zvo:m an ItAm- 
fortable rooms, when I’ve been out all day with the 
fatabl ru:ms, hzven aiv bi:n aut o:l dei zvid da 
rain pouring down.” 
rein po:riy daun” 
“You’d never make a good farmer’s wife,” Storm told 
“ju:d neva meik a gad fa:maz zvaif,” sto:m tould 
her. “No, but am I going to be one?” she smiled. “I 
ha:. e( nou, bat cem ai gouty ta bi: zvxn?” ji: smaild. “ai 
wish for = want 
pour = rain very 
hard 
625 
Chapter Fifty-Five (55). 
never knew you had a farm at home.” “I haven’t, 
neva nju: ju: had a fa:m at houm” “ai havnt, 
but I’m a great lover of nature, and not just for a 
bat aim a greit lwar av neitfa, an not d^Ast far a 
forest = very big 
wood 
day! I should like to walk for miles in a forest, with 
dei! ai fad laik ta wo:k fa mails in a forist, wid 
no other company than the animals.” “Not even me?” 
non Ada kAmpani dan di animals.” “not i:van mi:?” 
Marion interrupted. “No, you’d rather stay at home 
mcerian inta'rAptid. “non, ju:d ra:da stei at houm 
and play in the kitchen or lie in the bath all day, you 
an plei in da kit fin o: lai in da ba:p o:l dei, ju: 
just told me,” he laughed. 
d^Ast tould mi:,” hi: la:ft. 
Hand in hand, they ran down the path towards the 
hand in hand, dei ran daun da pa:p ta'wo:ds da 
farm again. At the hollow tree Storm stopped to ask 
fa:m a'gein. at da holou tri: sto:m stopt tu a:sk 
Marion if she was still willing to become his wife. 
marian if fi: was stil wilhj ta bi'kAm his waif. 
“If not, I had better put you back into the tree,” he 
“if not, ai had beta put ju: bak inta da tri:,” hi: 
said to her. “Are you quite sure?” “Yes, quite 
sed ta ha:. “a: ju: kwait fua?” “jes, kwait 
certain,” she answered. “Even if I was a tired and 
sa:tn,” fi: a:nsad. “i.van if ai was a taiad an 
dirty farmer working all day in the fields to make 
da:ti fa:ma wa.kiy o:l dei in da fi'.lds ta meik 
626 
The Fifty-Fifth (55th) Chapter. 
the soil of our farm better and better, and raising 
da sail av aua fa:m betar an beta, an reiziy 
soil = earth 
cows and pigs and sheep, and you had to be a farmer’s 
kauz an pigz an ji:p, an ju: had ta bi: a fa:maz 
wife and raise hens and sell the eggs in the market 
waif an reiz henz an sel di egz in da ma.kit 
every Saturday?” 
evri scetadi?” 
“The way you say it, it sounds quite nice,” she 
“da wei ju: sei it, it saundz kwait nais,” ji: 
answered. “Do you think I could make enough money 
a.nsad. “du: ju: pirjk ai kad meik i y n\f mAni 
raising fowls to pay for a bathroom in our farm- 
reizitj faulz ta pei far a ba.prum in aua 'fa:m- 
house?” 
'bans?” 
They both laughed at this idea and continued their 
dei boup la:ft at dis ai'dia and kan'tinju:d dea 
way. They soon saw the red brick walls of the house 
wei. dei su:n sa: da red brik zva:lz av da haus 
again. The woman was standing at the window. A 
a'gein. da wurnan waz stcendiy at da windou. a 
broad, kind smile appeared on her face when she saw 
bra:d, kaind smail a'piad an ha: feis hzven ji: sa: 
Storm and Marion coming hand in hand. “There 
sta:m and mcerian kAiniy hcend in hand. “dea 
you see, Marion,” Storm said, “‘all the world loves 
ju: si:, mcerian” sta:m sed, (<i a:l da wa:ld Iavz 
627 
Chapter Fifty-Five (55). 
a lover.’ Just look at her face! You would think 
a Lwa/ d$ASt luk at hd: feis! ju: wad pifjk 
that I had asked her and not you to marry me.” 
ddt ai had a:skt ha: an not ju: ta rncari mi :/ 3 
WORDS: 
hill 
curve 
brake 
wheel 
dust 
ditch 
certain 
cake 
bottom 
brick 
fence 
gate 
fowl 
wing 
turkey 
end (verb) 
Pig 
fat 
pump 
bucket 
brook 
path 
oak 
spread 
above 
EXERCISE A. 
The highest of the — south of London is called Leith 
Hill. The bus in which Storm and Marion were riding 
came round a — in the road. The driver was so quick 
in using the — and stopping the bus that the — made 
a cloud of — behind it. Storm was quite — that the 
driver would never run his bus into the — at the side 
of the road. The bus stopped at the — of a hill. 
The farm-house was made of red —. The garden was 
surrounded by a wooden —. It was difficult to find 
the — in the fence. The farmer's wife started feeding 
corn to the —. They hurried up to her as fast as their 
legs and their — would carry them. Among the fowls 
there was a —. 
There was also a — which ran about so much that it 
did not grow — like the others. The farmer's wife went 
to the — to get her empty — filled with water. In her 
grandmother’s time they got water from a —. There 
was a — to Leith Hill through the wood. Storm and 
Marion sat down at a table under a large old — tree, 
which — its branches far out on all sides — their heads. 
On one of the branches there was a — with eggs in it. 
628 
The Fifty-Fifth (55th) Chapter. 
Storm had brought his — along and wanted to get a 
picture of one of the —, before they — to the top of the 
hill. The river Thames — in the bottom of a —. Marion 
had found a — in a — tree, big enough for her to get 
in through. In some places the water of the brook had 
washed the earth away round the —. Between London 
and the south coast there are many — hills. 
EXERCISE B. 
In chapter 52, Exercise D, you found a letter from Storm 
to Wood. We now ask you to answer this letter as if 
you were Wood. In writing your letter, the following 
words must be used in some way or other: stamp — 
collection — room — furniture — desk — armchair — 
new — tree — leaf — cold — rain — storm — spring. 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
Look at the verbs in the following sentences: I visited 
my friend yesterday. John walked all the way to town 
the other day, and so did his sister. A month ago my 
uncle went to Paris. You will notice that the time of 
the verbs is before ‘now’; it is ‘yesterday’ in the first 
example given, ‘the other day’ in the second, and 
‘a month ago’ in the third. The form of the verb that 
expresses the time before ‘now’ we call the past [pa:st] 
tense. 
The past tense of two of the verbs in the sentences 
given above has been made by adding -ed to the form 
nest 
fellow 
camera 
bee 
mount 
flow 
valley 
hole 
hollow 
root 
slip 
chalk 
tent 
cover 
canvas 
forest 
soil 
nature 
lover 
free 
flat 
pretty 
raise 
charge 
around 
pour 
629 
Chapter Fifty-Five (55). 
of the infinitive: visited (visit-ed), walked (walk-ed). 
The past tense of most English verbs is made in this 
way. (But if they end in -e, only -d is added. Example: 
hope — hoped.) The past tense of ‘call’ is: I called, 
you called, he called, she called, it called, we called, 
you called, they called. You will see that the form 
is the same after all pronouns. 
The -ed is pronounced [/] after the voiceless sounds 
P, k, f, p, s . /. After the voiced consonants b, g, m, n, y, 
v , d, l, z, 3 , and after vowels, it is pronounced [d]. After 
t and d, the pronunciation is f id]. Examples: hoped 
\houpt\, thanked [pccykt], bathed [beidd], answered 
[a:nsdd\, started [sta:tid J, added [adid]. 
In writing, the following rules must be noticed: If a 
verb ends in a consonant followed by -y, it changes -y 
into i- before the -ed of the past tense is added. For 
instance, try — tried. 
But if a vowel comes before -y, the -y remains when -ed 
is added. For instance, stay — stayed. Only the verbs 
‘lay’, ‘pay’, ‘say 5 have ‘laid 5 , ‘paid 5 , ‘said 5 in the past 
tense. 
If a single consonant ends the verb, it is sometimes 
made double when -ed is added. The rules are seen 
from the following examples: 
explain-ed plan-ned 
answer-ed prefer-red 
Rule number one: The consonant always remains single 
when following two vowels. 
630 
The Fifty-Fifth (55th) Chapter. 
Rule number two: The consonant remains single after 
an unstressed \.\nstrest\ single vowel, but is made double 
after a stressed fjr/rrj/J single vowel. (The verb ‘prefer’ 
is pronounced with the stress \strcs] on the last syllable, 
-fer. We say that -fer is stressed or is pronounced with 
stress, and we show this by putting the mark 1 before the 
syllable: [pri'fa: |.) To this rule there is, however, the 
exception that -1 is made double even after an unstressed 
vowel. Example: travel-led. 
Notice that the past tense of ‘have’ is ‘had’. 
‘Be’ is the only verb that has two forms in the past 
tense: ‘was 5 and ‘were’. They are used in the following 
way: I was, you were, he was, she was, it was, we were, 
you were, they were. 
Questions: 
How is the past tense of most English verbs made? ... 
When is the -ed pronounced [t\ and when [</]? ... If a 
verb ends in -y in the infinitive, do you always change 
it into -i before -ed is added? ... When is a single 
consonant that ends a verb made double before -ed is 
added? ... When does it remain single? ... What are 
the two past tense forms of ‘be’? ... 
631 
Chapter Fifty-Six (56). 
The Fifty-Sixth (56th) Chapter. 
THE LAND OF LIBERTY 
One evening, when Storm and Marshall had decided 
wah i:vnirj, hwen sta.m and nici:jal had di'saidid 
to stay at home and read, Storm asked Marshall about 
ta stei at ho uni and ri:d , sta:m a:skt ma.fal about 
some words in the book he was reading. “The book 
sam wa:dz in da buk hi: waz ri:dirj. “da buk 
is written in English, but yet it seems to me that it’s 
iz ritn in iijglif, bat jet it si:mz ta mi: dat its 
different from the English I’m used to,” Storm said. 
difrant fram di ijglif dim ju:st tu” sta:m sed. 
“Now take this word, for instance: ‘street-car’. It was 
“nan teik dis wa:d, far instans: i stri:tka:\ it waz 
not until I had met it several times that I discovered 
rut ah' til ai had met it sevral taimz dat ai it is'h Arad 
that it must mean a ‘tram’.” 
dat it mast mi:n a € treem 
“I’ll tell you why you find the language strange,” 
“ail tel ju: hum ju: faind da Ueygzuid 3 streind 3,” 
Marshall smiled. “It isn’t English at all; it’s American.” 
ma.fal smaild. “it iznt iyglif at a:l; its amcrikan 
“Oh, is it? I didn’t know that American was different 
“ou, iz it? ai didnt non dat a'merikan waz difrant 
from English,” Storm said. “Perhaps you will explain 
fram iyglif,” sta:m sed. “pa'hceps ju: zeil iks'plein 
632 
The Fifty-Sixth (56th) Chapter. 
to me what these other words mean. I’ve made a list 
ta mi: hwat di:z Ada zva:dz mi:n. oiv nieid o list 
of all the words that were new to me, although I think 
av a:l da wa:dz dat wa: nju: ta mi:, a:Vdou ai pirjk 
I have discovered the meaning of some of them myself. 
ai hav disk wad da mi: nig av sahi ov dam mai'self. 
‘Railroad’, that must be the same as ‘railway’; and a 
‘ reilroud y , dcct mast bi: da seim az ‘reihvei 9 ; and a 
‘five-dollar bill’ is a ‘five-dollar note’, isn’t it?” “Yes, 
‘faivdala bil y iz a ‘faivdala nout y , iznt it?” “jes, 
that’s quite right,” Marshall answered. 
dccts kwait rait” ma:jal a.nsad. 
“And after a little hard thinking,” Storm continued, 
“and a:ftar a litl haul piykiy ” sto:m kan'tinju:d, 
“I found out that ‘baggage’ must be th.e same as 
“ai found out dat ( bcegid^ y mast bi: da seim az 
‘luggage’. But here are two that were too difficult for 
€ L\gid^ y . bat Jriar a: tu: dat zva: tu: difikalt fa 
me: What is a ‘subway’, and what does ‘depot’ mean?” 
mi:: hzvat iz a C s\bzvci y , an hwat d\z i di:pou y mi:n?” 
“What on earth have you been reading, since you have 
“hzvat an a:f> hav ju: bi:n ri:diy, sins ju: hav 
found such a strange collection of words?” Marshall 
found sAtf a streind$ ka'lckfan av wa:dz?” nia.fal 
asked. “A book about a young man who runs away 
o:skt. “a buk a'bout a jAij mcen hu: r\nz a'wei 
from home somewhere in Europe, goes to America, and 
fram hoiim SAinhwear in juarap , gouz tu a'merika, an 
633 
Chapter Fifty-Six (56). 
travels all over the country.” 
trcevlz o:l ouva da k\ntri” 
“I thought it must be something about travelling,” 
“ai po:t it mast In: s Amply a'baut trcevliy,” 
Marshall said. “You see, all those words have some- 
ma:fal sed. “ ju : si:, o:l dons wa:ds hav sahi- 
thing to do with travelling. ‘Subway’ is the same as 
pit} ta du: wid trcevlhj. i SAbwei y iz da seim az 
our ‘Underground’; perhaps you remember from your 
ana ‘ Audagraund ’; pa'hceps ju: ri'memba frani jo: 
school-days that ‘sub’ is Latin for ‘under’; and ‘depot’ 
sku:ldeiz dat ‘ sAb ’ is lectin fa ( Atida y ; an *di:pou y 
is the American expression for ‘station’. They use the 
iz di a'merikan iks'prefan fa ( stcifan y . dci ju:z da 
word ‘station’, too, but just as America is rich in so 
waul i steifan y , tu:, bat d^\st az a'merika iz ritf in son 
many other ways, it is, as you see, also rich in 
meni Ada weiz, it iz, az ju: si:, o:lsou ritf in 
expressions.” 
iks'prefanz” 
“Thanks! But tell me, Marshall — now that America 
“ pccijks! bat tel mi:, nurfal — nan dat a'merika 
has become such a great and rich country, aren't you 
haz bi'kwm SAtf a yrcit an ritf kAtitri, a:nt ju: 
English sorry sometimes that it’s no longer an English 
iyylif sori SAintaimz dat its non loygar an itjglij 
colony?” “We don’t think much about that nowadays,” 
kolani?” “zt n: dount piyk m.\tf a'baut deet nauadeisf ’ 
634 
The Fifty-Sixth (56th) Chapter. 
Marshall answered. “And, besides, it really was our 
ma:fdl a:nsad. “an, bi'saidz, it riali waz auar 
own foolish generals and statesmen who lost our 
oun fu:lif d^enaralz an steitsman hit: last auar 
American colonies for England — not to mention the 
a'merikan kalaniz far iy gland — tut ta men fan da 
king, George the Third.” Storm: “How did it happen?” 
kiy, dy:d$ da pa:d” sta:m: “hau did it hcepn?” 
“The Americans were dissatisfied with many things, 
“di a'merikanz zaa: 'dis'scetisfaid wid meni. fiyz, 
and in many cases they had some cause to be dis- 
and in meni keisiz dei had sahi ka:z ta bi: 'dis¬ 
satisfied with the government of the colonies. There 
'sect is fa id laid da g.wanmant av da kalaniz. dea 
were great differences between life in England and life 
■ira: greit difransiz bi'twirn laif in iy gland an laif 
in the ‘New World*, and many of the men that England 
in da ‘ nju: zaa:ld\ an meni av da men dat iygland 
sent to America to look after her affairs had no under- 
sent tii a'merika ta Ink a:fta ha:r a'feaz had non Aiida- 
standing of this at all, but did many things that only 
1 steendiy av dis at a:l , bat did meni piyz dat ounli 
made the Americans more and more angry. 
meld di a'merikanz nu:r an ma:r ceygri. 
“What made them very angry, for instance, was the 
“hwat meid dam veri ceygri. far installs , zvaz da 
tax that was put on tea. England had just helped the 
tceks dat waz put an ti:. iy gland had d^.xst helpt da 
dissatisfied = not 
satisfied 
cause = reason 
tax = a kind of 
duty 
635 
Chapter Fifty-Six (56). 
thirteen American colonies in a war with France, and 
pa:ti:n a'merikan kalaniz in a wa: nnd fra:ns, an 
now England wanted the colonies to help to pay for 
nan iygland wantid da kalaniz ta help ta pei fa 
the army. But the Americans said that as long as the 
di a:mi. bat di amerikanz sed dat az lay az da 
colonies had no representatives in the British Parliament, 
kalaniz had non repri'zentativz in da britif pa:lamant, 
Parliament had no right to put a tax on anything in the 
pu. laniant had non rait ta put a tceks an enipiy in da 
colonies. And quite right they were, I think.” 
kalaniz. an k'wait rait dei iea:, ai piyk.” 
“So do I,” Storm said. “But go on, please; I find it 
“son du: ai,” sta:m sed. “bat gon an, pli:z; ai faind it 
very interesting to hear an Englishman speaking about 
veri intristiij ta Jiiar an iyglifman spi.kiy a'baut 
‘the American question’ in this way.” “Do you really 
i di a'merikan kwestfan ’ in dis 7 vei” “du: ju: riali 
want me to tell you more about it?” Marshall asked in 
want mi: ta tel ju: ma:r a'baut it?” ma:fal u:skt in 
some surprise. “I thought you knew almost as much 
s.aui sa'praiz. “ai pa:t ju: nju: a:lmoust az niAtj 
— or as little — about it as I do.” “No, I don’t. You 
— a: r az litl — a'baut it az ai du:” “non, ai dount. ju: 
see, I wasn’t very interested in history at school. When 
si:, ai waznt veri intristid in histari at sku:l. Jiwen 
preparing my lessons, I never read my history-book, 
pri'peariy mai lesnz, ai neva red max histaribuk, 
636 
The Fifty-Sixth (56th) Chapter. 
and, consequently, I don’t know much history. The 
an, kansikwantli, cii dount non m\tj hist art. di 
only thing I really remember is something about a 
ounli piy ai riali ri'memba iz s\mpiy a'bant a 
tea-party.” 
ti:pa:ti. )} 
“The Boston tea-party! Well, I’ll give you a lesson 
“da bast an ti:pa:ti! wel, ail gw ju: a tcsn 
in history, then, and tell you about our war with 
in Jiistari, den, an tel ju: a'baut ana wa: wid 
America. When the Americans wouldn’t pay the tax 
a'merika. hzeen di a'merikanz wudnt pci da tccks 
that had been put on tea, and stopped drinking tea, 
dat had bi:n put an ti:, an stapt driykiy ti:, 
King George got very angry and sent over some ships 
kiy dy:d$ gat veri ecygri an sent ouva sain jips 
full of tea and told the Americans to buy the tea. 
ful av ti: an tould di a'merikanz ta bai da ti:. 
“But in the night, Americans dressed up as Indians 
(C bat in da naif, a'merikanz drest \p az indjanz 
went on board the ships and poured all the tea into 
went an ba:d da jips an pa:d a:l da ti: inta 
the harbour. That was the ‘tea-party’ you remembered. 
da lia:ba. dcut waz da c ti:pa:ti ’ ju: ri'membad. 
Soon after this action open war broke out between 
su:n> a:fta dis cekfan oupan ica: brouk ant bi'twi.n 
action = act 
America and England, a war that was to end in making 
a'merika and iygland, a zea: dat zx'az tn end in meikiy 
637 
Chapter Fifty-Six (56). 
two separate nations of England and her American 
tu: seprit neijanz av ivjgland an ha:r a'merikan 
colonies. But perhaps it was a good thing, after all. 
kalaniz. bat pa'keeps it n>az a gud pig , a:ftar a:l. 
England has grown again to be one of the greatest 
iff gland haz groun a'gein ta hi: wa n av da greitist 
empires of the world — it may really be said that our 
empaiaz av da wa:ld — it niei riali hi: sed dat nuar 
empire extends to all corners of the earth. 
empaia iks'tendz tu a:l ka:naz av di a:p. 
“And on the other hand, after the colonies got their 
“and an di Ada Jucnd, a:fta da kalaniz gat dr a 
liberty, they continued to grow in size, and now the 
libati, dei kan'tinju :d ta grou in soiz, an nan da 
country extends from the Atlantic all the way across 
kxntri iks'tendz frani di at'lcentik a:l da wei a'kras 
to the Pacific. The country that we call America con- 
ta da pa'sifik. da k\ntri dat zvi: ka:l a'merika kan - 
sists of 48 separate states, each with its own laws. 
'sists av fa:ti'eit seprit steits, i:tf n f id its oun la:z. 
But they are united into one nation, and have one 
bat dei a: jic'naitid inta zc.w/ neijan , an hav wah 
law for things that are important to all the states. 
la: fa pigz dat a:r ini' pa :t ant tu a:l da steits. 
That is why the country is called the ‘United States of 
dcct iz hwiii da kxntri iz ka:ld da ^jic'naitid steits av 
America’.” “What made the first people leave England 
a'merika V’ “Ineat meid da fa:st pi:pi li:v hjgland 
638 
The Fifty-Sixth (56th) Chapter. 
and go to America?” Storm asked. “Wasn't there 
an gou tu a'merika?” sta:m a.skt. “waznt dea 
sufficient work and food for them in England?” “Yes, 
s a'f if ant wa:k an fu:d fa dam in iy gland?” “jes. 
that had nothing to do with the reason. But shortly 
dcet had nApiy ta du: zvid da ri:zn. bat ja:tli 
after sixteen hundred, there was a lot of religious 
a:fta siksti:n h\ndrad, dea waz a lot av ri'lid^as 
trouble in England, and the cause of the trouble was a 
tr\bl in iy gland, an da ka:z av da tr\bl waz a 
new Act that said that all church services in England 
njii: cckt dat sed dat a:l tfa:tf sarrisiz in iygland 
must be held in a way that was very much like the 
mast bi: held in a zvei dat zvaz veri m.\tf laik da 
way the Catholic services were held. However, there 
zvei da k<epalik sa:znsiz voa: held. hau'eva, dea 
were many people who thought that this was not the 
zea: nieni pi:pi hit: pa:t dat dis zvaz not- da 
right way to worship God, and who would not do 
rait zvei ta zva:fip gad, an Jut: zvad rut du: 
as the law said. Often, when they came together to 
az da la: sed. a:fn, hzven dei keim ta'geda ta 
worship God, people who held the other opinion would 
zva.fip gad, pi:pi hu: held di a dar a'pinjan wad 
come and interrupt their services and try to start fights 
k\\m and bit a 1 r Apt dea sa.visiz an troi ta sta:t faits 
with them. In all this trouble many people were hurt, 
wid dam. in a:l dis trAbl meni pi:pl zva: ha:t, 
sufficient = 
enough 
639 
Chapter Fifty-Six (56). 
poor (here) = 
needing help or 
care 
and some even killed in the fights, and at last some 
an s.\m i:van kild in da faits , and at la:st saw 
of them decided to leave England and go to America, 
av dam di'saidid ta li:v iygland an gou, tu a'merika, 
where they would have liberty to worship God as they 
hwea dci wad hccv libati ta zva:jip god az del 
thought best, without being killed for it.” 
po:t best, wid'aut bi:iy kild far it” 
“Poor fellows!” Storm said. “I wonder if many more 
u pua felouz!” sto:m scd. “cii wxndar if meni mo:r 
of them weren’t killed by the Indians in America?” 
av dam wa:nt ’kild bai di indjanz in a'merika?” 
“Yes, that’s just what happened,” Marshall replied. 
“jes, deets d^xst hwot hcepnd” ma.fal ri'plaid. 
“Only a very few of the Englishmen who arrived in 
u ounli a veri fju: av di iyglifman ha: a'raivd in 
America on the famous ‘Mayflower’ lived to see the 
a'merika on da feiinas i meiflaua y livd ta si: da 
next spring. In the first place, they had not brought 
nckst spriy. in da fa:st pleis, dci had not bro:t 
sufficient food with them from England, and in the 
sa'fifant fu:d n 'id dam fram iygland, and in da 
second place, the Indians hated the white men, or the 
sokand pleis, di indjanz heitid da hwait men, o: da 
pale-faces, as they called them, and killed many of 
peilfeisiz, az dei ko:ld dam, an kild meni av 
them. The English went in fear of their lives both 
dam. di iyglif went in fiar av dea laivz boup 
The Fifty-Sixth (56th) Chapter. 
day and night and never felt safe. Much blood was 
dei an naif an neva felt seif. ni.\tj bl.ul was 
shed to conquer America from the Indians.” 
fed ta kaykar a'merika fram di indjanz.” 
“One can easily understand that the Indians hated 
“w\n kan i:zili Anda'stcend dat di indjanz heitid 
those pale-faced strangers and regarded them as their 
douz peilfeist streind^az an ri'ga.did dam az dear 
enemies,” Storm said. “They couldn’t understand each 
enimiz” sta:m sed. u dei kudnt Anda'stcend i:tf 
other at first, and so it was impossible for the white 
Adar at fa:st , an sou it waz im'pasabl fa da hwait 
men to explain to the Indians that they only wanted 
men tu iks'plein ta di indjanz dat dei otinli zvantid 
a small part of the country to live in. The Indians, of 
a sma:l pn:t av da kAntri ta liv in. di indjanz, av 
course, had a fear that the pale-faces were going to 
ka:s, had a fia dat da peilfeisiz wa: gouty ta 
take the whole continent, and thought they could stop 
teilc da houl kantinant , an pa:t dei had stop 
them by killing them. I think that if the Indians 
dam bcii kiliy dam. ai piyk dat if di indjanz 
hadn’t been in such a hurry to start fighting, but had 
hcednt bi:n in SAtf a liAri ta sta:t faitiy, bat had 
waited until they and the pale-faces could understand 
zee it id An'til dei an da peilfeisiz kad Anda'stcend 
each other, there wouldn’t have been so much trouble, 
i:tf Ada, dea zvudnt hav bi:n sou niAtf trAbl, 
He sheds, he shed, 
he has shed [ feds, 
fed, fed]. 
641 
Chapter Fifty-Six (56). 
pretty 
rather 
and so much blood would not have been shed.” 
an sou in At f Mac i wad not hav bi:n fed.” 
“I don’t think it would have made much difference,” 
“cii dount piyk it zvad hav meid mAtf difrans” 
was Marshall’s opinion. “People have been making 
zoaz ma:falz a'pinjan. i( pi:pl hav bi:n meikiy 
war upon each other for less reason than that since 
zvo:r a 1 pan i:tf Ada fa les ri:zn dan dcet sins 
the beginning of history. It seems to be the nature 
da biginiy av histari. it si:mz ta bi: da neitjar 
of man to hate and to kill, and, consequently, many 
av mccn ta heit an ta kil, an, konsikwantli, meni 
must live in fear of others and suffer pain from the 
mast liv in fiar av Adaz an SApa pein fram di 
actions of others. Now that I come to think of it, we 
cckfanz av Adaz. nau dat ai kAin ta piyk av it, zvi: 
(here) = 
really are a pretty bad lot, don’t you think so, too?” 
riali a:r a priti bced lot, dount ju: piyk sou. tu:f” 
“Some of us, yes,” Storm answered. “But at least those 
(( sAin av as, jes” sto:m arnsad. C( bat at li:st dons 
first Americans seem to have been the right sort of 
fa:st a'merikanz si:m ta hav bi:n da rait so:t av 
men. They were willing to take upon themselves all 
men. dei zva: zviliy ta teik a'pan dam'selvz o:l 
the work, all the difficulties, all the suffering that 
da zca:k, o:I da difikaltiz, j:l da SApariy dat 
living in the New World meant, in order to be allowed 
liviy in da nju: zva.ld ment, in a:da ta bi: a'laud 
642 
The Fifty-Sixth (56th) Chapter. 
to worship God in the way they thought right. They 
to Wd:jip god in da wei dei po:t rait. bei 
stayed on over there, even though they suffered very 
steid on ouvo bed, i:van bon bet sxfdd veri 
much both on account of the cold winters and the 
niAtf boup on o'kaunt ov bd kould wintoz on bo 
fights with the Indians, and because they did not have 
faits ivib bi mdjonz, on bi'koz bei did not hcev 
sufficient food. Thus the great nation of the United 
so'fifont fu:d. b.\s bo grcit neijon ov bo ju:'naitid 
States to-day owes its existence to the courage with 
steits to'dei ouz its ig'zistons to bo k\rid 3 wib 
which these people settled a question of religion which 
Jmdtf bi:z pi:pl setld 0 kwestjon ov ri'lid^on hwitf 
was more important to them than their lives. Not a bad 
woz 1110:r ini'po:tout to bom bon beo laivz. not 0 heed 
sort of people for a nation to begin with!” 
so:t ov pi:pi for 0 neijon to hi'gin wib!” 
“No, that’s right,” Marshall agreed. “But look what 
(C nou, beets rait” ma:fol o'gri:d . “hot luk hzvot 
has happened over there since then. America has 
hoz heepnd ouvo beo sins ben. o'meriko hoz 
been in too great a hurry to grow big and strong, and 
him in tu: greit 0 JiAri to grou big on stroy, on 
many Americans have been in too great a hurry to 
mcni o'merikonz hov bi:n in tu: greit 0 JiAri to 
get rich quickly. They haven’t had much time left 
get ritf kwikli. bei hcevnt heed mAtf taim left 
thus ~ in this 
way 
settle (here) = 
decide 
643 
Chapter Fifty-Six (56). 
Liberty 
over for thinking about those fine ideas of liberty that 
ouva fa piykiy a'baut douz fain ai'diaz dv libdti dat 
made the first Americans leave their mother coun- 
meid 
da fa:st 
a'merikanz li:v 
dea 
mAda 
kAtl- 
try. 
However,” 
he 
continued, “I 
do 
think 
America 
In. 
hau'eva” 
hi: 
kan'tinju:d, “ai 
du: 
piyk 
a'merika 
has earned the Statue of Liberty which the people 
haz a:nd da stcetju: av libati hwitf da pi:pi 
of France gave America in 1886 , as a sign 
av fra:ns geiv a'merika in eiti:n eiti'siks, az a sain 
of the love of liberty in both countries. It’s an 
av da Iav av libati in boup kwntriz. its an 
extremely tall statue, you know, placed on an island 
iks'tri:mli ta:l stcetju:, jit: non, plcist an an ailand 
just outside New York, — the first sign that you have 
d^Ast autsaid nju: ja:k, — da fa:st sain dat jit: hav 
come to a free country.” 
kAm tu a fri: kAntri” 
“Yes, I know,” Storm replied. “I’ve read about it. 
“jes, ai nou/ f sta:m ri'plaid. “aiv red a'baut it. 
Inside it, you can go all the way up to the head, 
insaid it, jit: kan gou a:l da wei Ap ta da hod, 
where you can look out through the eyes and thus 
hwea ju: kan luk ant pru: di aiz an 
get a wonderful view of New York. The Americans 
get a wAndaful vju: av nju: ja:k. di aincrikanz 
are very proud of the ‘sky-line 5 of New York, as 
a: veri praud av da ‘skailain 5 av nju: ja:k, az 
644 
The Fifty-Sixth (56th) Chapter. 
they call it, the line of houses and towers seen against 
dei ka:l it, da lain av hauziz dn taudz si:n a'geinst 
the sky when your boat is entering the harbour. I 
da skai hwen jj: bout iz entariy da ha:ba. ai 
hope to see it some day.” 
houp ta si: it sun dei.” 
“So do I,” Marshall said, as he prepared to go to 
“sou du: ai ” ma:fal sed, az hi: pri'pead ta gou ta 
bed. “Perhaps we could go there together.” “Yes, 
bed. u pa'h(Fps wi: kad gou dea ta'geda.” “jes, 
perhaps we might,” Storm answered. “Well, good 
pa keeps wi: mait ” sta:ni cr.nsad. “wcl, gud 
night!” 
miit!” 
EXERCISE A. 
In America a tram is called a —. A railway is called 
a —, and a five-dollar note a-. The Underground 
the Americans call the —, and a — is a station. The 
American word for luggage is —. In former times 
America was an English —. The Americans were — 
with the English government of their country. 
The English put a — on the tea that was sent to the 
Americans. Storm never read his — at school. The 
war between England and her American colonies ended 
in making two — nations of them. The British Empire 
— to all corners of the earth. 
WORDS: 
railroad 
bill 
street-car 
subway 
depot 
baggage 
colony 
lesson 
dissatisfied 
tax 
separate 
extend 
liberty 
645 
Chapter Fifty-Six (56). 
Atlantic 
Pacific 
unite 
worship 
sufficient 
fight 
hate 
pale-face 
pale-faced 
When the American colonies had got their —, they grew 
in size, and now the country — from the — all the 
way across to the —. America now consists of 48 
states — into one nation. Some people in England who 
wanted to — God in their own way went to America 
to do so. They did not bring — food along from England. 
They suffered on account of the — with the Indians. 
kill 
fear 
shed 
suffer 
action 
hurry 
cause 
statue 
thus 
sign 
The Indians — the white men, or the —, as they called 
them, and — many of them. The English went in — 
of their lives. Much blood was —. It seems to be the 
nature of man to hate and kill, and, consequently, many 
must — pain from the — of others. America has been 
in a great — to grow big and strong. 
EXERCISE B. 
Answer these questions with full sentences: 
Are you interested in music? ... Do you think you are 
musical? ... Do you play any instrument? ... Do you 
like to dance? ... Have you been taught dancing? ... 
Do you like modern dance-music? ... Do you like to 
sing, and have you got a good voice for singing? ... 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
In the sentences “I have walked five miles the last three 
days”, “the girl has played in the garden for an hour”, 
“he had looked out of the window for me just before 
646 
The Fifty-Sixth (56th) Chapter. 
I arrived”, ‘walked 5 , ‘played 5 , and ‘looked 5 are called 
second participles | piutisiplz]. (The first participle, 
‘playing 5 , etc., we are going to hear about later.) You 
will notice that the second participle of verbs like these 
has the same form as the past tense. 
The second participle is used with the present tense of 
‘have 5 to make the perfect [p3:fikt\ tense: I have called, 
you have called, he has called, she has called, it has 
called, we have called, you have called, they have called. 
The second participle is also used with the past tense 
of ‘have 5 to make the pluperfect \'plu:'pa:fikt\ tense: I 
had called, you had called, he had called, she had called, 
it had called, we had called, you had called, they had 
called. 
The second participle of ‘be 5 is ‘been 5 , and the perfect 
tense is as follows: I have been, you have been, he has 
been, she has been, it has been, we have been, you have 
been, they have been. The pluperfect is made with the 
past tense of ‘have 5 : I had been, you had been, he had 
been, she had been, it had been, we had been, you had 
been, they had been. 
Questions: 
What other form of the verb is as a rule the same as 
the second participle? ... What is the second participle 
used for? ... What is the second participle of the 
verb ‘be 5 ? ... 
647 
Chapter Fifty-Six (56). 
EXERCISE D. 
siksti'eit, nelsn roud, 
wimblddn. 
dd twenti'eitp av dycn. 
did zvud, 
aim sjri ddt it has bi:n sou lay bi'fa:r aiv found 
taim tu a:nsd jo: leta, hwitf ai ri'si:vd a:Vredi at da 
bi'giniy av la:st wi:k. bat ju: si:, an im'pa:tant tfeind 3 
has teikn pleis in mai laif sins mai la:st leta, and j :1 
mai taim and a:l mai pa:ts hav bi:n teikn \p zvid it. 
da fcckt is, mcerian cdwads has pramist ta bi'k.\m mai 
waif, sou fram bi.iy a laitha:tid j.\y man wid'out a 
hear in da wa:ld, aiv sxdnli bi:n tfeindyi intu a nuen 
zvid veri siarias pa:ts a'baut da fju.tfa, nan dat aim 
(jouiy ta hccz > a fcemili av mai oun. 
its strcind 3 ta piyk dat at da seim taim Jnven mcerian 
and ai zva:r an da trip hwear ai a:skt ha: dcet veri 
im'pa.tant kwestfan, an hwea wi: wa:kt in da zca.ni 
s ah fain a nda da gri:n tri:s, ju: zua: handy sta:ms zvid 
rein an kould at houm. bat dat riali is \n'ju:$ual, 
i:van in ana kxntri, at dis taim av da jia. hou'eva, 
spriy an s\ma du: kAin a:lia in iygland dan at houm. 
in da pa:ts av iy gland dat aiv si:n an mai trips, da 
li:vs zva:r aut a:Vrcdi at da bi'giniy av eipril. ^ 
wel, ai houp ta hi a fram ju: a'gein veri sum: ai 
want ta non hwat ju: piyk av da c greit nju:s y . as 
ju: non clout kan si: fram mai leta, ai havnt him 
.eibl ta piyk av niAtf els di:s la.st tu: wi:ks. 
ja:s sin'siali, 
sta:m 
648 
Chapter Fifty-Seven (57). 
The Fifty-Seventh (57th) Chapter. 
THE BRITISH EMPIRE 
Marshall had often promised Storm to take him to the 
ma:fal had o:fn pramist sto:m td teik him td da 
House of Commons when the members were present 
haus av kamanz hwen da memhaz zva: prcznt 
and the House at work. Storm wanted to see some 
and da haus at wa:k. sta:m want-id- ta si: saw 
of its famous members and hear them speak. Marshall 
av its feimas memhaz and hia dam spi:k. ma:jal 
felt this promise as a debt of honour. So, at length, 
felt dis prjmis az a det av ana. sou, at leyp, 
one afternoon after office hours he decided to pay 
wau a:fta'nu:n a:ftar of is auaz hi: di'saidid ta pei 
this debt. He went with Storm to the House of 
dis dot. hi: went zvid sta:m ta da haus av 
Commons, and they spent some hours there, listening 
kamanz, and dei spent sam auaz dea, lisniy 
to the different speakers. 
ta da difrant spi:kaz. 
Among other matters several colonial questions were 
a'mAf) Ada mcctaz sevral ka'lounjal kzvestjanz wa: 
discussed, which seemed to be of much interest to 
dis'kwst, hwitj si:md ta hi: av MAtf intrist ta 
Storm. On their way home he seemed to be thinking 
sta:m. an dea zvei houm hi: si:md ta bi: pit/kiy 
debt = something 
which is owed to 
somebody 
colonial = having 
to do with colonies 
649 
Chapter Fifty-Seven (57). 
of something, and after dinner, when they were making 
av SAinpifj, and a:fta dina, hzvcn dci zva: meibig 
themselves comfortable, each in a big chair, he said 
dam'selvz kxmjatabl, i.:tj in a big tfta, hi: scd 
to Marshall, “The colonial questions which were dis- 
ta ma:fal , “da ba'lounjal bzvestfanz hzvitj zva: dis¬ 
cussed in Parliament to-day interested me more than 
l kAst in pa:larnant ta'dei intristid mi: ma: dan 
anything else, though I didn’t always catch the meaning; 
enipig els, don ai didnt a:lzvaz kcetj da mi:nig; 
for after all, I know far too little about the colonies. 
far a:ftar a:l , ai non fa: tic litl a 1 bant da balaniz. 
For instance, I don’t know how they’re governed.” 
far instans, ai donnt non han do a gAvand” 
“It isn’t so easy,” Marshall said, “to tell you in a few 
“it iznt son i:zi” ma:fal scd , “ta tel jn: in a fju: 
words about their government, because they’re not all 
u*a:dz a'baut dea gAvanmant, bi'kaz dea nat >.7 
manner = way 
governed in the same manner; but we could talk a little 
gAvand in da scim mccna; bat zvi: bad ta:k a litl 
about the question until bedtime. I’ll start in a 
a'baut da kwestfan ah' til bedtaim. ail sta:t in a 
moment = a very 
short time 
moment. First I’ll go out to the kitchen and get some 
mourn ant. fa:st ail gou ant ta da kit fin an get sam 
matches so that we can try the new cigarettes I bought 
inert/ : z sou dat zvi: ban trai da nju: siga'rets ai ba:t 
to-day.” He did so, and a few moments later they 
ta'dei” hi: did sou, and a fju: moumants leita dei 
650 
The Fifty-Seventh (57th) Chapter. 
were enjoying their cigarettes. “Well, Storm,” said 
7 va:r indyiiy bea siga'rets. u wel, sta:ni” seti 
Marshall, taking up the conversation again, ‘Til first 
ma:jal, teikiy a p da kanva'seifan a'gein, “ail fa:st 
tell you about a number of countries which used to 
tel ju: a'baut a nxmbar av hwntriz hwitj ju:st ta 
be governed by Britain. The best known of them are 
hi: (jAvand bai britan. da best noun av dam a: 
Canada, New Zealand, Australia, South Africa, India, 
kcenada, nju :'zi .land, a.s'treilja , saup cefrika, indja, 
and Pakistan. We call these countries Dominions. 
an pa:ki'sta:n. wi: ka:l di:z kAntriz da'minjanz. 
They have their own governments which look after 
dei Jucv dear oun (jAvanmants Jvzvitj Ink a:ftar 
affairs of interest to the Dominions themselves. Re- 
a'fraz av intrist ta da da'minjanz bam'selvz. ri- 
garding foreign affairs which are of importance to the 
'(ju:diy farin a'feaz lnvitj ti:r av im'pa.tans ta da 
regarding = as to 
whole Empire, they have the same right as the mother 
houl enipaia, dei hccv da seim rait az da mAda 
country to decide what steps should be taken. So you 
kAHtri ta di'said hwat steps fad bi: teikn. sou ju: 
see, Storm, that it would be incorrect to regard Britain incorrect = not 
si:, sta:m, dat it wad bi: inka'rekt ta ri'ga.d britan correct 
and the Dominions as a country with its colonies. It's 
an da da'niinjanz az a kAntri wid its kalaniz. its 
rather a number of states which are held together by 
rci.dar a tiAinbar av steits hwitf a: held ta'geda bai 
651 
Chapter Fifty-Seven (57). 
development = 
growth 
nineteenth century 
= the time from 
the year 1800 to 
the year 1900 
gain = win 
the same interests of trade and politics.” 
da seim intrists av treid an palitiks” 
“But the Dominions cannot have had all these political 
“bat da da'minjanz kccnat hav heed j: 1 di:z pa'litikal 
rights from the beginning,” Storm interrupted. 
rciits frani da bi'giniij” sta:m inta'r\ptid. 
“No, they’re the fruits of a development which has been 
“non, dea da fricts av a di'velapmant hzvitf haz bi:n 
going on for many years,” Marshall continued. “At 
gouiy an fa meni ji3z” ma:fal kan'tinju:d. “at 
first the Dominions were simply colonies which could 
fa: st da da'min fans zva: simpli kalaniz hzvitf bad 
not make decisions regarding many of their own affairs 
nat meik di'si^anz ri'ga:dirj mcni av dear oun a'feaz 
without asking Britain, but the political development 
zeid'aut a:skirj britan , bat da pa'litikal dPvelapmant 
which took place in the nineteenth century has made 
hzvitf tuk pleis in da nainti:np sentfnri haz mcid 
it necessary for Britain to give them greater and 
it ncsisari fa britan ta giv dam greitar an 
greater liberty to look after their own affairs, and by 
greita libati ta Ink a:fta dear oun a'feaz, an bai 
the year 1900 half of the Dominions had 
da jia naintirn hxndrad ha:f av da da'minjanz had 
gained their present rights.” “And the fact that the 
geind dea preznt raits” “an da feekt dat da 
Dominions have gained these political rights is no 
da'minjanz hav geind di:z pa'litikal raits iz nou 
652 
The Fifty-Seventh (57th) Chapter. 
doubt an important reason why Britain has been able 
(l ant d>i im'pj.tdnt rr.zn hzvai britdn hdz bi:n eibl 
to keep her connection with them,” Storm said. “It’s 
ta ki:p hs: ks'nekfdu zvid d 3 m” stj.'tn sed. “its 
the same with nations as with people. You can almost 
dd seirn zvid neifsnz 3Z zvid pi:pi. ju: kdn o.lmoust 
always have your way with them if your behaviour 
j:Izv3z hccz' jo: zvei zvid d3in if jj: bi'heivj3 
towards them is gentle and understanding. If Britain 
t3 l zvj:dz d3in ic dyntl 3nd \nd3 x stcendirj. if brit3n 
had used force against her present Dominions instead 
Ji3d jiczd fj:s 3 'geinst J 73 : preznt ds'minjsnz in'sted 
of being gentle with them, they would have been lost 
dv bi:iy d$entl zvid dsm, dci zvsd Ji3v bi:n hst 
now, I suppose, as her former North-American colonies 
nau. ai S3'pouz, 3Z hs: fj.md 'ru:ps'meriksn koteniz 
were lost when she used force against them, sending 
zv3: hst hzven fi: ju:zd fj:s 3 'geinst ddm , sendiy 
armies across the sea to fight them.” ' “No doubt you’re 
a:miz s'kros ds si: t3 fait d3m ” “non daut jn3 
right,” Marshall replied. “But though the Dominions 
rait” ma:f3l ri'plaid. “b3t dou d3 dd'minjsnz 
are the best known parts of the British Empire, we 
a: d 3 best noun pa:ts 3v ds britif einpais, zvi: 
must not forget to say a few words about the colonies 
ni3st tut f3'get ts sei 3 fju: zv3:dz 3'baut d3 kjhniz 
proper. They’re parts of the British Empire with 
prop 3 . ded pa.ts 3v d3 britif empais zvid 
653 
Chapter Fifty-Seven (57). 
an official = 
a person who 
works for the 
government 
the natives of a 
country = the 
people belonging 
by birth to the 
country 
just = right 
only a few Englishmen — soldiers and officials — 
ounli a fju: iyglifman — sould^az and a'fifalz — 
living among the natives. They're governed from 
livhj a'm.\y da neitivz. dea (j:\vand fram 
Britain, that is, by the Colonial Office in London. 
britan, dcrt iz, bai da ka'lounjal afis in I And an. 
The Colonial Office sends a representative, a so-called 
da ka'lounjal afis scndz a repri'zentativ. a souka.ld 
Governor, to each of the colonies to look after the 
gAvana, tu i:tj av da kalaniz ta Ink a:fta di 
affairs of the colony. Of course, he can’t do all the 
a'feaz av da kalani. av ka:s, hi: ka:nt du: a:l da 
work himself, but has a number of officials to help 
zva:k him'self, bat haz a tiAmbar av a'fifalz ta help 
him. He and the officials together make up the 
him. hi: an di a'fifalz ta'geda nicik a p da 
highest authority of the colony. Naturally, the 
haiist o.'poriti av da kalani. ncetjrali, da 
Governor is always in connection with the Colonial 
gwanar iz a:lwaz in k a'nek fan wid da ka'lounjal 
Office in London, telling it what happens in the 
afis in l\ndan , teliy it hzvat hcepnz in da 
colony and getting orders as to what to do in im- 
kalani an getiy a:daz az ta hzvat ta du: in im¬ 
portant matters.” 
'pa: tent meet as. 99 ^ 
“Wouldn’t it be more just of Britain to let the colonies 
“zvudnt it bi: me: d^\st av britan ta let da kalaniz 
654 
The Fifty-Seventh (57th) Chapter. 
have governments of their own, just like the Do- 
hav gAvanmants av dear oun, d$Ast laik da da- 
minions'!” Storm asked. 
1 min jam?” sto:m a:skt. 
“Perhaps it would be just,” Marshall replied, “but the 
“pa 1 haps it wad hi: d^Ast” ma:fal ri'plaid, “bat da 
natives of most of the colonies are not white people, 
neitivz av moust av da kolaniz a: not hwait pi:pi, 
and wouldn’t be able to govern themselves. When the 
an wudnt hi: eibl ta gwan dam'selvz. hwen di 
English first came to these places, the natives in many 
iyglif fd-'st keim ta di:z pleisiz, da neitivz in meni 
cases were nothing but wild or savage tribes, living 
keisiz wa: nApiy hat waild o: scevid 3 traibz, liviy 
under the conditions offered by nature; so the English 
a nda da kan'difanz a fad bai neitja; sou di iyglif 
have had to take care of them. However, as the 
hav heed ta teik kear dv dam. hau'eva, az da 
natives become more used to European ideas, it is 
neitivz bi'kAin mo: ju:st ta juara'pian ai'diaz, it iz 
the intention of the British to give all the colonies 
di in'ten fan av da britif ta giv d: 1 da kolaniz 
self-government. 
'selfgAvanmant. 
“I know that it’s the general opinion of many foreigners 
“ai nou dat its da d^enaral a 1 pinjan av meni forinaz 
that Britain has only thought of her own interests in 
dat britan haz ounli pa:t av ha:r oun intrists in 
asavage 
intention = 
purpose 
655 
Chapter Fifty-Seven (57). 
fair = just 
rule (here) = 
government 
connection with the colonies, but this is not quite fair. 
ha'nek fan u’id da kahniz, bat dis iz not kwciit fra. 
In the colonies where the natives were savages when 
in da halaniz hwra da neitivz wa: sccvidyz hwcn 
they came under British rule, Britain has really done 
dci kcim And a britif ru:l, britan haz riali d.\n 
a lot of good work for the people, making their life 
a l at av gnd wa:k fa da pi: pi, meikiy dr a hvif 
easier, building schools and hospitals for them, etc., 
i.zia, bildiy sku:lz an haspitlz fa: dam , it'setra, 
and on the whole trying to be just and fair. But it 
and an da houl troiiy ta bi: d^Ast an fra. bat it 
would be incorrect to say that all the colonies like to 
wad bi: inha'rekt ta sci dat a:l da halaniz loih ta 
be under British rule.” 
bi: And a britif ru:l” 
“At least many of the people in India didn’t like it 
“at li:st mem av da pi: pi in indja didnt laik it 
as they came to feel equal with the Europeans,” Storm 
az dei keim ta fi:l i:kwal wid da juara'pianz” sta:m 
said with a smile. “From the papers and also from 
sed wid a smail. “fram da peipaz and a:Ison fram 
a number of books I’ve read, I know that there used 
a n\mbar av buhs aw red, ai non dat dr a ju:st 
to be much trouble with India from time to time. 
ta bi: m\tf tiwbl wid indja fram taim ta taim. 
Could you tell me a little more^about the government 
had jii: tel mi: a lift ma:r a'lnmt da gAvanmant 
656 
The Fifty-Seventh (57th) Chapter. 
of India? I've no definite idea of it.” “Before 
dv indja? aiv non definit ai'dia av it” “bPfa: 
1947 the government of India was different 
nainti:n fa:ti'sevn da gwanmant av indjd waz difrant 
from that of the Dominions as well as from that of 
fram dcet av da da'minjanz az wel az fram dcet av 
the colonies,” was Marshall's reply. “It did not govern 
da kalaniz” waz mcr.jalz ri'plai . “it did not gwan 
itself. It was governed by the British and the Indians 
it 1 self, it waz gwand bai da britif an di indjanz 
together. The country is so large — having nearly 
ta'geda . da kAntri iz sou la:d$ — hceviy niali 
400 million people — that there was a special 
fa: liAndrad miljan pi:pl — dat dea ivaz a spefal 
government department in London, called the India 
gwanmant di'pci:tmant in l And an, ka:ld di indja 
Office, looking after Indian affairs. But as you 
afis, lukiy a:ftar indjan a'feaz. bat az ju: 
mentioned, Britain often had trouble with India — 
mcnfand, britan a:fn had trAbl wid indja — 
mostly on account of the manner in which it was 
moustli an a'kaunt av da mcenar in hwitf it waz 
governed. Many of the Indians wanted their country 
gAvand. meni av di indjanz wantid dea kAntri 
to be given self-government as soon as possible.” “And 
ta bi: givn 'selfgAvanmant az su:n az pasabl” “an 
wasn't it to do justice to them, Marshall, to offer them 
waznt it ta du: d^Astis tu dam, ma:fal, tu afa dam 
definite = clear 
in meaning 
do justice to = 
be just to 
657 
Chapter Fifty-Seven (57). 
what they wanted?”• Storm asked. “If it was only 
Jizvat dci zvantid?” sta:m a:skt. “if it zvaz ounli 
a question of doing justice to them, they would 
a kzvcstjan av dir.iy d$.\stis tu daw, dei wad 
have been given self-government a long time before,” 
hav bi:n givn 'self gw an want a lay taiw bi'fa 
Marshall replied. “In 1917 the British 
ma.fal vi'plaid. “in nainti.n scvnti.n da britif 
Government declared that its intention was the develop- 
(j.wanmant di'kkad dat its in'ten fan zvaz da di'velap- 
ment, step by step, of the same sort of self-government 
want, step bai step, av da seim sa:t av 'selfgxvanmant 
for India as the Dominions had. But India consists 
jar indja az da da'minjanz heed. bat indja kansists 
of many nations, with different ideas of life and with 
av weni neijanz, zvid difrant ai'diaz av laif an zuid 
different religions. Several of them were not at all 
difrant ri'lid^anz. sevral av daw zva: nat at a:l 
interested in a national and united India, but thought 
intristid in a neefanal an ju:'miitid indja, bat pa:t 
only of their own interests, while others were satisfied 
ounli av dear oun intrists, hzvail \daz zva: scetisfaid 
with British rule, because they thought that if India 
zvid britif rn:l, bi'kaz dci pa:t dat if indja 
was left to itself, there would be more trouble, perhaps 
zvaz left tu it'self, dea zvad bi: ma: tr\bl, pa'keeps 
war, instead of the good conditions that the country 
wa:, in'sted av da gud kan'difanz dat da kxntri 
658 
The Fifty-Seventh (57th) Chapter. 
enjoyed under British rule. That is one of the reasons 
in'd^aid Anda britif ru:l. dcet iz w\n av da ri:znz 
why Britain, at one time, was not willing to give up 
hwai britan, at w\n taint, waz not zviliy ta giv Ap 
India, even if Indians like the famous Gandhi, for 
indja, i:van if indjanz laik da feimas gcendi:, far 
instance, wanted it.” 
ins tans, wantid it” 
“It seems as if the British were a little in doubt as 
“it si:mz az if da britif wa:r a litl in daut az 
to what to do with Gandhi,” Storm said. “Several 
ta hzvat ta du: wid gcendi:,” sta:m sed. “sevral 
times they punished him by sending him to prison, and 
taimz dei p\nift him bai sendiy him ta prizn, an 
when he had been in prison for some time, they set 
hzven hi: had bi:n in prizn fa SAm taim, dei set 
him at liberty again. In my opinion, they might just 
him at libati a'gein. in mai a'pinjan, dei mait d^Ast 
as well have given up punishing him, for I’m sure that 
az wel hav givn Ap pAnifiy him, far aim jua dat 
punishment cannot change the political opinions of a 
pAnifmant kcenot tfeind 3 da pa'litikal a } pinjanz av a 
man like that, even if it’s a punishment which sends 
nicen laik dat, i:van if its a pAnifmant hzvitf sendz 
him to prison for several years.” 
him ta prizn fa sevral jiaz” 
“The British didn’t think that either when they put 
“da britif didnt piyk dcet aida hzven dei put 
prison 
659 
Chapter Fifty-Seven (57). 
him in prison! They regarded him as a danger to the 
him in prizn'l dci ri'ga:did him sz a deind^a ta da 
State, because it was his political purpose to make the 
steit, bi'kjz it waz hiz pa'litikal pa:pas ta meik di 
Indians stop working in industry and thus make 
indjanz stop wa:kiy in indastri an d \s meik 
trouble for the British Government. However, after the 
trxbl fa da britif gwanmant. hait'wa, a:fta da 
war of 1939—1945, the British 
wj :r av naintirn pa:ti'nain ta nninti.n fa: ti'f a iv, da britif 
Government made a definite plan for India. They 
gwanmant meid a definit phcn far indja. dci 
declared that the British troops and government officials 
di'klead dat da britif trir.ps an gwanmant a'fifalz 
would leave India in 1948. The Indians would 
wad li:v indja in naintirn fo:ti x eit. di indjanz wad 
then have to decide for themselves whether they wanted 
den hcev ta di'said fa dam'selvz hweda dci want id 
to remain in the Empire as a self-governing Dominion, 
ta ri'mein in di empaia az a 'self'gwaniy da'minjan , 
or whether they wanted to be a completely separate 
a: hweda dei zvantid ta bi: a kam l pli:tli scprit 
country without any connection with Britain. In 
k\ntri wid'aut eni ka'nekfan wid britan. in 
1947 the English and the Indians agreed 
nainti'.n fa:ti'sevn di iyglif dn di indjanz a'griui 
to divide the whole of India into the two Dominions 
ta di'vaid da houl av indja inta da tit: da'minjanz 
660 
The Fifty-Seventh (57th) Chapter. 
of India and Pakistan, and on the fifteenth of August 
av indjd an pa:ki'sta:n, and on da fifti:np av o:gast 
of that year these Dominions received self-government. 
av dcet jia di:z da'minjanz ri'siivd 'self gAvanmant. 
For my part I hope that these new Dominions will keep 
fa mat pa:t ai houp dot di:z nju: da'minjanz wil ki:p 
their connection with Britain, for they have so many 
dca ka'nekjan wid britan, fa dei hav sou ineni 
advantages of trade to offer each other. And I think, 
ad'varntidyz av treid tu afar i:tf Ada. and ai pitjk, 
too, that good old Clive in that case would be happy 
tu:, dat gud ould klaiv in dcet kcis wad bi: hcepi 
in his grave.” 
in hiz greiv.” 
“Who’s Clive?” Storm asked. “Clive! You don’t say 
U hu:z klaiv/” storm a:skt. “klaiv! ju: dount sei 
that you’ve lived in England for about a year 
dot ju:v livd in iyglond far a'baut a jia 
without hearing the name of Robert Clive?” “I’m 
wid'aut hiariij da neim av robat klaiv?” u aim 
afraid so, but Fd like to hear something about him.” 
a'freid sou, bat aid laik to hia s Am pit) a'baut him” 
“Indeed, I must tell you about him at once. You cannot 
“in'di.d, ai mast tel ju: a'baut him at wahs. ju: kcenot 
go about without knowing who Robert Clive is. He 
gou a'baut wid'aut nouiy hu: robat klaiv iz. hi: 
was a great soldier and is famous for the battles he 
waz a greit sould^a and iz feimas fa da beetle hi: 
661 
Chapter Fifty-Seven (57). 
military = having 
to do with soldiers 
and war 
fought in India against the French and the Indians, 
fa:t in indja a'geinst da frenf an di indjanz, 
when the British control of India began. He was born 
hwen da britij kan'troul av indja bi'gccn. hi: tvaz ba:n 
in 1725, and as a boy he was very interested 
in sevnti:n twenti'faiv, and az a bai hi: waz veri intristid 
in military life and wanted to be a soldier himself. He 
in militari Iciif an want id ta bi: a sould^a him'self. hi: 
made a kind of military organisation among his small 
meid a kaind av militari a.ganai'zeijan a'mAy hiz srna:l 
friends, with military law. After leaving school he 
frendz, void militari la:. a:fta li.viy sku:l hi: 
was sent to India. In all, he had three long stays in 
waz sent tu indja. in a:l, hi: had pri: lay steiz in 
that country, but it was during his first stay there that 
dcct IcAntri , bat it waz djuariy hiz fa:st stei dea dat 
he did wonders. I’m thinking especially of the fighting 
hi: did wwidaz. aim piykiy is'pejali av da faitiy 
at Arcot, which I should like to tell you a little about. 
at a:'kat, hwitf ai fad laik ta tel ju: a litl a'baut. 
But first of all you must hear something about the 
bat fa.st av a:l ju: mast hia SAinpiy a'baut da 
political development in India which led up to those 
palitikal di'velapmant in indja hzvitf led Ap ta douz 
fights. 
faits. 
“The French at that time had a large army in India, 
(( da frenf at dcct taim had a la:d$ a:mi in indja, 
662 
The Fifty-Seventh (57th) Chapter. 
and they had gained control of a large part of the 
an dci had geind k an 1 trend av a la:d$ pu:t av da 
country. The brave fighting of the French soldiers 
kwntri. da breiv faitiij av da frenf sould^az 
made a great impression upon the natives, who respected 
mcid a greit ini' pro fan a'pan da neitivz, hu: ris'pektid 
them and supported them by letting their own soldiers 
dam an sa'pa:tid dam bai letir/ dear oun sould^az 
fight with them. Now it was the plan of the French 
fait wid dam. nan it waz da plcen av da frenj 
to use the great power they had gained to drive the 
ta ju:z da greit puna dci had geind ta draiv di 
English out of India. 
irjglif aut av indja . 
“The English had tried to stop the rapid expansion of 
“di iijglij had traid ta stop da rcepid iks'peenjan av 
French power, but without success. No doubt, one of 
frenf paua, bat wid'aut sak'ses. nou daut, wah av 
the reasons for this was that they only had a few 
da ri:znz fa dis waz dat dei ounli had a fju: 
thousand soldiers in India. The greater part of them 
pauzand sould^az in indja. da greita pa:t av dam 
were at Madras, their most important city. Was the 
wa:r at ma'drees, dea moust iinpa:tant siti. waz di 
expansion of French power to continue, or could 
iks'peenjan av frenf paua ta kan'tinju:, a: kad 
anything be done to stop it? Clive, who at that time 
enipiij hi: dAti ta stap it? klaiv, hu: at dcct taim 
He drivesjie drove, 
he has driven 
[draivz, drouv, 
drivn]. 
expansion = 
spreading out 
663 
Chapter Fifty-Seven (57). 
retake = take 
back again 
He retakes, he 
retook, he has 
retaken [Vi \:'teiks, 
'ri:'tuk, 
'ri: l tcikn]. 
march = walk like 
a soldier 
troops = soldiers 
held a position equal to that of a captain in the army, 
held a pa'sifan i:kwal ta dcet av a kceptin in di a:mi, 
was of the opinion that the English should try to 
was av di a' pinjan dat di iyglif fad trai ta 
conquer Arcot, the capital of one of the native states 
kaykar a:'kat M da kcepital av zvau av da neitiv steits 
which was supported by the French. Then, he supposed, 
hwitf was sa'pa:tid hai da frenj. den, hi: sa'pousd, 
some of the soldiers that were on their way to Madras 
sam av da sould^as dat zva:r an dea wei ta ma'drees 
would be sent to Arcot instead in order to retake it, 
wad bi: sent tu a:'kat in'sted in a:da ta 'ri:'teik it, 
and, consequently, there would not be so many soldiers 
an, kansikwantli, dea wad nat bi: sou meni sould^as 
to fight against the English at Madras. The officers 
ta fait ageinst di iyglif at ma x drees. di afisas 
in that city thought his plan a good one and asked 
in dcet siti pa:t his plcen a gud zvah and a:skt 
him if he himself was willing to perform what he had 
him if hi: him'self was zviliy ta pa'fann hwat hi: had 
proposed that they should do. 
pra'pousd dat dei fad du:. 
“Clive at once agreed to this, and in a heavy storm 
“khiw at WAtis a'gri.d ta dis, and in a hevi sta:m 
with thunder and lightning he marched off towards 
wid pAndar an laitniy hi: ma.tft a:f tawa.ds 
Arcot as fast as possible with his troops, which only 
a.'kat as fa:st as pasabl wid his tru:ps, hwitf ounli 
664 
The Fifty-Seventh (57th) Chapter. 
consisted of 200 English soldiers and 300 
kan'sistid av tu: JiAndrad iyglif sould^az an pri: h\ndrad 
native soldiers, the so-called Sepoys, commanded by 
ncitiv sould^az, da soukj:ld si:paiz, ka'ma:ndid bai 
eight officers, only two of whom had been in battle 
eit jfisaz, ounli tu: av hu:m had bi:n in bcetl 
before. 
bi'fa :. 
“The soldiers of the town of Arcot weren’t very brave 
“fia sould^az av da taun av cc'kat wa:nt veri breiv 
and at once gave up the place without a fight. This 
and at waiis (jeiv Ap da pleis wid'aut a fait. dis 
was easier than Clive had expected, but if he couldn’t 
i:zia dan klaiv had iks'pektid, bat if hi: kudnt 
hold the city against the enemy, nothing would have 
honld da siti a'geinst di enimi, nApiy wad hav 
been gained. He knew that they would soon try to 
bi:n geind. hi: nju: dat dei ivad su:n trai ta 
retake the town, and that he would be forced to fight 
1 ri.'tcik da taun, an dat hi: wad bi: fa:st ta fait 
with only the few troops he had, because some soldiers 
wid ounli da fju: tru.ps hi: heed, bi'kaz sam sould^az 
that had been sent to help him had not been able to 
dot had bi:n sent ta help him had nat bi:n eibl ta 
reach Arcot on account of the enemy. So he prepared 
ri:tf a: 1 hat an a'kaunt av di enimi. sou hi: pri'pead 
everything to hold the town, took care of the distri- 
evripiy ta hould da taun, tuk kear av da distri- 
was forced to = 
had to 
665 
Chapter Fifty-Seven (57). 
distribution = 
dividing among 
people 
in addition = 
besides 
bution of food, etc. 
1 bju:fdn dvfu:d, it'setra. 
“The strength of the enemy army that came to retake 
“da streyp av di enimi a:mi ddt keim td 'ri:'teik 
the town was much greater than that of Clive’s, as 
da taun was mAtf greita dan dcet av klaivs, as 
the natives at first had more than 6000 soldiers, 
da neitivz at fa:st had ma: dan siks pauzand sould^as, 
and in addition, 4000 of the troops that had been 
and in a'difan, fa: pauzand av da tru:ps dat had him 
fighting near Madras were sent to support them. So 
faitiy nia ma'drees wa: sent ta sa'po.t dam. sou 
it seemed quite impossible that Clive should be able 
it si:md kwait im'pasabl dat klaiv fad hi: eibl 
to break the strength of this army. 
ta breik da streyp av dis a:mi. 
“The fighting lasted for fifty days. The native troops 
k ‘da faitiy la:stid fa fifti deiz. da neitiv truips 
surrounded the town, and there was fighting every day. 
s a'round id da taun, an dea was faitiy evri dei. 
Towards the end of that time, conditions had become 
tawa:dz di end av deet taim, kan'difans had bi'kwm 
very bad for Clive and his men. Many of his soldiers 
veri beed fa klaiv an his men. rneni av his sould^as 
had been killed, big holes had been shot in the walls 
had him kild, big houls had bi:n fat in da wa:lz 
of the town, and in addition to this there was but little 
av da taun, and in a'difan ta dis dea was bat litl 
666 
The Fifty-Seventh (57th) Chapter. 
food. However, Clive took care that the distribution 
fu:d. hau'eva , klaiu tuk kea dat da distri'bju:fan 
of it was just and did his best to help where help was 
av it waz d$ASt an did hiz best ta help hive a help waz 
needed. 
ni.did . 
“The troops outside thought that he would have to give 
“da tru:ps aut'said pa:t dat hi: wad hcev ta giv 
up the town and told him as much, but he said angrily 
a p da faun an tould him az mAtj, bat hi: sed ceygrili 
that they would soon know how British soldiers could 
dat dei wad su:n non hau britif sould^az kad 
fight. The natives then decided to take the town, cost 
fait. da neitivz den di'said id ta teik da taun, kast 
what it might, and a hard battle began. Clive, who 
Jrwat it mait, and a ha:d bcctl bi'gcen . klaiv, hu: 
had not had any rest for several days, had thrown 
had nat heed eni rest fa sevral deiz f had proun 
himself upon his bed; but when he heard that the 
him 1 self a'pan hiz bed; bat hwen hi: ha:d dat da 
battle which was to decide everything had begun, he 
bcetl hivitj waz ta di'said evripiy had bi'g\n, hi: 
rose from his bed at once, and led the fighting himself. 
rouz fram hiz bed at ivahs, an led da faitirj him'self . 
The enemy went forth to battle with a number of 
di enirni went fa:p ta bcetl wid a tiAmbar av 
elephants in front of them, but as soon as the troops 
elifants in frAnt av dam, bat az sn:n az da tru:ps 
667 
Chapter Fifty-Seven (57). 
in the town began using their guns, the elephants 
in da taun bi'gcen ju:ziy dr a g\nz, di elifants 
got quite wild and rushed back, killing many of the 
got kwait waild an iwft beck, kiliy meni av da 
natives. Without the elephants the enemy now tried 
neitivz . wid'out di elifants di enimi nan traid 
might = strength 
with all their might again and again to take the town, 
wid o:l dea inait a'gein and a'gein ta teik da taun, 
but they were driven back every time. The strength 
bat dei wa: drivn beck evri taim. da streyp 
of the little army in the town, fighting like lions and 
av da litl a:mi in da taun, faitiy laik laianz an 
bravely commanded by Clive, was too great. At 
breivli ka'murndid bai klaiv, waz tu: greit. at 
last the enemy was forced to give up the fight, and 
hi: st di enimi waz fo:st ta giv Ap da fait, an 
the rest of the troops marched away from the town. 
da rest av da tru:ps ma:tft a'wei fram da taun. 
Clive and his troops had won the battle. 
klaiv an hiz tru:ps had wah da bcetl. 
“From this day forth the French lost their power. 
“fram dis dei fo:f da frenf lost dea poua. 
Many of the natives would not help them any longer 
meni av da neitivz wad not help dam eni loyga 
when they found out how great the military strength 
liwen dei found out hau greit da militari streyp 
of the English was. Clive fought with all his might 
av di iyglif woz. klaiv fo:t wid o:l hiz mait 
668 
The Fifty-Seventh (57th) Chapter. 
against the French and the natives that still supported 
a'geinst da frenj an da neitivs dat stil sa'pa:tid 
them, and before long the day came when the power 
dam, an bi'fa: lay da dei keim hwen da pauar 
of the English in India was as great as and even 
av di iyglif in indja zvaz as greit cez and i:van 
greater than that of the French.” 
greit a dan deet av da frenj” 
“Thank you very much, Marshall,” said Storm. “How- 
“ pccyk ju: veri mAtf, ma:fal” sed sta:m. “hau- 
ever, there’s one more thing I should like to ask you 
'eva. daz zv.xn ma: piy ai fad laik tu a:sk ju: 
about,” he continued. “Certainly, old man,” Marshall 
a'baut” hi: kan'tinju:d. “sa.tnli , ould mean/' ma:fal 
replied. “I should like you to tell me something about 
ri'plaid. “ai fad laik ju: ta tel mi: s\mpiy a'baut 
Ceylon,” said Storm. “I know that it’s a very large 
si'Ian,” sed sta:m. “ai nou dat its a veri la:d% 
island near the south coast of India from which we get 
ailand nia da saup koust av indja fram hwitf wi: yet 
very good tea. But tell me, Marshall,” he said, “is 
veri gud ti:. bat tel mi:, ma.jal” hi: sed, “iz 
Ceylon part of the new Dominion of India?” “No, 
si'lan pa:t av da nju: da'minjan av indja?” “nou, 
answered Marshall. “Ceylon is not part of the Dominion 
a:nsad ma:jal. “si'hn iz not pa:t av da da'minjan 
of India. It has become a separate Dominion with self- 
av indja. it has bi'kAm a seprit da'minjan wid 'self- 
669 
Chapter Fifty-Seven (57). 
government, in the same way as India and Pakistan,” 
'gAvanmant, in da seirn wei as indja an pa:ki stain/’ 
he continued. 
hi: kan'tinjuid. 
“Thank you, Marshall,” said Storm. “I hope we can 
“payk ju:. ma:fal” sed staim. “ai houp wi: kan 
continue our discussion of the British Empire some 
kan'tinju: aua dis'kAfan av da britif empaia sam 
other evening.” 
\da iivniy” 
WORDS: 
forth 
command 
moment 
definite 
debt 
Dominion 
colonial 
manner 
regarding 
incorrect 
native 
wild 
savage 
force 
force (verb) 
troops 
military 
strength 
oower 
EXERCISE A. 
The colonies of the British Empire are not all — in 
the same manner. The political rights of the Dominions 
are the fruits of a — which has been going on for many 
years. By the year 1900 half of the Dominions had — 
their present rights. Storm supposed that if England 
had used — against her present Dominions instead of 
being — with them, they would have been lost now. 
The colonies proper are parts of the British Empire with 
only a few English soldiers and — living among the —. 
The highest authority of a colony proper is the —. Storm 
asked if it would not be more — to let the colonies 
proper have governments of their own. When the Eng¬ 
lish first came to the colonies, the natives in many 
places were nothing but — or — tribes. 
Marshall thought that on the whole England had tried 
to be just and — towards her colonies. Storm had no 
670 
The Fifty-Seventh (57th) Chapter. 
— idea of the government of India. The English — 
Gandhi several times by sending him to —. Storm 
thought that — cannot change the political opinions 
of men like Gandhi. As a boy, Clive was very interested 
in — life. 
It was the plan of the French to use the great — they 
had gained to — the English out of India. The English 
had tried to stop the rapid — of French power. At 
Arcot Clive took good care of the just — of food. The 
— of the enemy army was much greater than that of 
Clive’s. The enemy tried with all their — to take 
Arcot, but at last they were — to give up the battle. 
EXERCISE B. 
Write 200—300 words about a film you have seen. In 
what cinema did you see it? In what country had it 
been produced? Who played in it? What was it about? 
Was it a good or a bad film? Tell us about all this 
in your own words as well as you can. 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
The forms of most English verbs are made in the same 
way as those of ‘to call’. We call these verbs regular 
might 
drive 
drove 
driven 
march 
gain 
retake 
retook 
retaken 
addition 
development 
expansion 
justice 
official 
punishment 
just 
punish 
prison 
gentle 
bedtime 
distribution 
fair 
govern 
Indian 
Governor 
Sepoy 
century 
intention 
rule 
Pakistan 
Ceylon 
\regjuld\ verbs. From what you have learned about 
them so far, you will have seen that if you know the 
infinitive, you will be able to make all the other forms. 
But in the case of some other verbs this is not so. 
671 
Chapter Fifty-Seven (57). 
Example: write, wrote, written (he writes, he wrote, 
he has written). Of such verbs you must know the 
infinitive, the past tense, and the second participle, in 
order to be able to make the different forms and tenses 
of the verb. We call these verbs irregular [i'regjuh] 
verbs. Other examples are: eat, ate, eaten; give, gave, 
given; swim, swam, swum. 
The verbs ‘shall 5 , ‘will’, ‘can’, ‘may’ are also irregular 
verbs; they only exist in the present tense and in the 
past tense: shall — should; will — would; can — could; 
may — might. 
‘Must 5 and ‘ought 5 are the same in the present tense 
and in the past tense. Examples: You must go now. 
When he came home, I told him that he must go again. 
You always ought to help your friends. When you 
visited your uncle, you ought to have told him the 
truth. 
Questions: 
Mention one or two of the regular verbs that you have 
learned. ... Mention one or two of the irregular verbs 
that you have learned. ... What are the past tense forms 
of ‘shall 5 , ‘will 5 , ‘can 5 , ‘may 5 ? ... What are the past tense 
forms of ‘must 5 and ‘ought 5 ? ... 
672 
Chapter Fifty-Eight (58). 
The Fifty-Eighth (58th) Chapter. 
THE CAT IS LET OUT OF THE BAG 
“Look here, Storm,” Mr. Edwards said one afternoon, 
“luk hid, sto:mmist dr edwddz sed wah a:ftd'nu:n, 
as they were sitting in Mr. Edwards’ study up to 
dz dei wd: sitirj in mist dr edwddziz stAdi Ap td 
their eyes in letters, bills, and all sorts of papers. 
dedr aiz in letdz, bilz, dnd o:l so:ts dv peipdz. 
“We shall have to find out why the goods that come 
“wi: fdl hcev td faind aut hwai dd gudz ddt kAm 
to us via Portsmouth have been so late in reaching 
tu as vaid pd. tsmdp hdv bi:n sou leit in ri:tfiy 
us the last few times; we can’t have all these delays. 
as dd la:st fju: taimz; wi: ka:nt hcev o:l di:z di'leiz. 
Twice there has been a delay of five days. Please go 
twais ded hdz bi:n d dilei ov faiv deiz. pli:z gou 
to the telephone in the hall and ring up Marshall. 
td dd telifoun in dd ho: l dn rig Ap ma:jdl. 
Ask him to send a wire to Portsmouth. I demand 
a:sk him td send d waid td po:tsmdp . ai di'ma:nd 
to know the reason for those delays at once. Tell 
td nou dd ri:zn fd douz di'leiz ot WAns. tel 
Marshall that we want a reply by wire to-day, so that 
ma:fdl ddt wi: wont d ri'plai bai waid td'dei, sou ddt 
he may be able to send the necessary cables to the 
hi: mei bi: eibl td send dd nesisdri keiblz td dd 
wire = telegram 
cable = telegram 
across water 
16/1 
673 
Chapter Fifty-Eight (58). 
error = 
wrong 
Continent, if they don’t know anything about it at 
kantinant, if dei dount nou enipiy a'baut it at 
Portsmouth. I want to get to the bottom of this 
pa:tsmap. ai want ta get ta da bat dm av dis 
question now, and it takes too long to send letters. 
kwestfan nau, and it teiks tu: lay ta send let as. 
So, as I said, I want Marshall to send a wire to 
sou, as ai sed, ai want ma:fal ta send a waia ta 
Portsmouth, and, if necessary, to cable to the Con- 
pa:tsmap, and, if nesisari, ta keibl ta da kan- 
tinent.” 
tinant.” 
When Storm had rung up Marshall and given him the 
hwen sta:m had rAy Ap maifal and givn him da 
message from the manager, Marshall replied, “I know 
mesid$ fram da mcenid^a, ma:fal rtplaid, “ai nou 
a fellow at the customs office in Portsmouth. I think 
a felou at da kAstams afis in pa:tsmap. ai piyk 
I’ll send a personal wire to him and ask him to help 
ail send a pa:snl waia ta him and a:sk him ta help 
something 
us to find the error. For it seems clear to me that 
as , ta faind di era. far it si:ms klia ta mi: dat 
it must be somebody down there who is making an 
it mast bi: SAmbadi daun dea hu: is meikiy sn 
error of some kind or other.” 
era av SAm kaind a:r Ada.” 
“Yes, do that,” Storm said. “And then ring me up as 
“jes, du: dcet,” sta:m sed. “an den riy mi: Ap as 
674 
The Fifty-Eighth (58th) Chapter. 
soon as you have learned something about it.” As he learn something 
su:n az ju: hav la:nd SAinpiy a'bant it/' dz hi: i^fonnation 1 
returned from the telephone in the hall, he met Marion 
ri'ta:nd fram da telifoun in da ho:l, hi: met mcerian 
just leaving her father’s room. “Hallo!” he greeted 
d^ASt li:viy ha: fa:baz ru:m. “lia'lou!” hi: gri:tid 
her with a smile. “You certainly have courage to go 
ha: wid a smail. “ju: sa:tnli hcev kArid$ ta gou 
in to your father when he’s so busy. It must have 
in ta jo: fa:da hwen hi:z sou bizi. it mASt hav 
been something pretty important you had to tell him.” pretty (here) = 
r a ther 
bi:n SAinpiy priti im'po:tant ju: heed la tel him / 3 
She didn’t answer him, but hurried away. 
fi: didnt a:nsa him, bat hArid a'wei. 
He shook his head a little in surprise at her behaviour, He shakes, he 
hi: fuk hiz hed a litl in sa'praiz at ha: bi'heivja, shaken ^[feikf Juk 
jeikn]. 
but entered the room without trying to stop her. Here 
bat entad da ru:m zvid'aut traiiy ta stop ha:, hia 
he found Mr. Edwards standing at the window in 
hi: faund mistar edwadz stcendiy at da windou in 
deep thought, not looking busy at all. When he heard 
di:p po:t, not lukiy bizi at o:l. hwen hi: ha:d 
Storm, he turned round with a little smile and said, 
sto:m, hi: ta:nd round wid a litl smail and sed, 
“Well, my boy, Marion has just told me about you two. 
“wel, mai boi, mcerian haz d$ \st tould mi: a'bant ju: tu:. 
And although young women no longer have to ask their 
and o:l'dou jAy wimin nou loyga hcev tu a:sk dea 
16/2 
675 
Chapter Fifty-Eight (58). 
father’s permission to marry, I’m happy to be able to 
fa:das pd'mifdn ta mceri, aim hcepi ta bi: eibl ta 
say that I should gladly have given Marion my per- 
sei dat ai fad glcedli hav givn mcerian max pa- 
mission to marry you, had she asked me. This is a 
1 mi fan ta mceri ju:, had fi: a:skt mi:. dis is a 
surprise to me. — I wonder what my wife is going to 
sa'prais ta mi:. — ai WAnda hwot mai waif is gouirj ta 
say about it! Where have we had our eyes? But, of 
sei a'baut it! hwea hav wi: heed auar aisf bat, av 
why! = oh! 
course, modern girls aren’t kept under observation in 
ko:s , modan ga:ls a:nt kept Andar obsa'veifan in 
the same way as their mothers were when I was young. 
da seim wei as dea mAdaz wa: hwen ai was jArj. 
Why! You must have been seeing each other quite 
hwai! ju: mast hav bi:n si:iy i:tf Ada kwait 
a lot to find time for coming to such an important 
a lot ta faind taim fa kAiniy ta SAtf an im'po:tant 
decision!” 
di'si^an!” 
“Not nearly enough, Mr. Edwards,” Storm replied. 
“not niali i'nAf, mistar edwads,” sto:m ri'plaid. 
“You see, there were always so many people about to 
“ju: si:, dea wa:r o:lwas sou meni pi:pl a'baut ta 
prevent me from telling her all the things I had to 
pri'vent mi: from teliij ha:r o:l da pit/s ai heed to 
say — and when it did look as if I was going to have 
sei — on hwen it did luk as if ai was gouiy ta hcev 
676 
The Fifty-Eighth (58th) Chapter. 
a chance, she always seemed to be able to find some- 
a tja:ns, fi: a:lwaz si:md td bi: eibl td faind saiu- 
thing to prevent me from talking about it just then! 
pirj td prevent mi: frdin ta.kiy a'baut it d$Ast den! 
But I can play at that game, too,” Storm continued 
bat ai kan plei at dcet geim, tu:,” sta:m kan'tinjuid 
with a little laugh, thinking of their trip to Leith Hill. 
wid d litl la:f, piykiy av dea trip ta li:p hit. 
“I caught her in a place the other day where she 
“ai ka:t ha:r in a pleis di Ada dei hwea fi: 
couldn’t get away, and for once there were no unwanted 
kudnt get a'wei, an fa WAns dea wa: nou 'An'wantid 
unwanted = not 
wanted 
persons about. So I just kept her there till she ac- 
pa:snz a'baut. sou ai d$ASt kept ha: dea til fi: ac¬ 
cepted me.” 
1 septid mi :.” 
“Hem, well,” Mr. Edwards replied, “I’ve made the 
“hm, wel” mistar edwadz ri'plaid, “aiv meid di 
observation several times myself that one must use a 
obza'veifan sevral taimz mai'self dat wau mast ju:z a 
strong hand with women now and then. It was the 
stray hcend wid wimin nau an den. it waz da 
same with her mother when we ...” He suddenly 
seim wid ha: mAda hwen wi: . . hi: SAdnli 
interrupted himself here and continued in another voice, 
inta'rAptid him'self hia and kan'tinju:d in a'nAda vais, 
“Well, shall we go to the sitting-room and break the 
“wel, fal wi: gou ta da sitiyrum an breik da 
677 
Chapter Fifty-Eight (58). 
break the news = 
tell the news 
grant = give 
brain 
news to my wife?” 
nju:z ta mai waif?” 
They found Mrs. Edwards in the garden with Marion. 
dei faund misiz edwadz in da ga:dn wid mcerian. 
“Now, what do you think of that?” Mr. Edwards 
“nau, hwot du: ju: piyk av dcet?” mistar edwadz 
asked. “Do you think we can grant these two children 
a:skt. “du: ju: pirjk wi: kan gra:nt di:z tu: tfildran 
our permission to marry?” “I think it’s wonderful, and 
aua pa'mifan ta mceri?” “ai pirjk its WAndaful, an 
that he’s a very nice boy for our Marion. May God 
dat lii:z a veri nais bai far aua mcerian. mei gad 
bless you, children! I hope you’ll be very happy.” 
blcs ju:, tfildran! ai houp ju:l bi: veri her pi” 
“Thank you, mother — we shall,” Marion answered, 
“pcerjk ju:, riiAda — wi: feel,” mcerian a:nsad, 
with a little smile at Storm’s red face. 
wid a litl smail at sta:mz red feis. 
“But you don’t look very surprised,” Mr. Edwards 
“bat ju: dount luk veri sa'praizd,” mistar edwadz 
said to his wife. “Oh no, I’ve been expecting this for 
sed ta hiz waif. “ou nou, aiv bi:n iks'pektiy dis fa 
some time. Haven’t you?” He replied by shaking his 
SAHi iaim. hcevnt ju:?” hi: ri'plaid bai jeikiy hiz 
head. “Why, with your wonderful brain, I thought 
lied. “hwai, wid jo: WAndaful brein, ai pa:t 
you had found out long ago!” “I may have got a good 
ju: had faund aut lay a'gou!” “ai mei hav gat a gud 
678 
The Fifty-Eighth (58th) Chapter. 
brain, as you say, and be able to use it in my work. 
brein, az ju: sei, an bi: cibl ta ju:z it in mai Wd:k. 
But Ill never be so wise about life as you are, my 
bat ail neva bi: son waiz a'baut laif az ju: a:, mai 
dear,” Mr. Edwards answered. “Your mother is a 
dia” mistar edwadz a.nsad. “jo: niAdar iz a 
very wise woman, Marion,” he continued; “you can’t 
veri waiz zviiman, mcerian” hi: kan'tinju:d; “ju: ka:nt 
teach her very much about life.” 
ti:t{ ha: veri mAtf a'baut laif.” 
“Yes, I do hope Marion will grow up to be like you,” 
“jes, ai du: houp mccrian wil grou Ap ta bi: laik ju:” 
Storm said seriously, but with laughing eyes. “Grow 
sto:m scd siariasli, bat wid la:fhj aiz. “grou 
up!” Marion cried. “Now, children, please!” laughed 
Ap!” mcerian braid. “nan, tjildran, pli:z!” la:ft 
Mrs. Edwards. 
misiz edwadz. 
“Life may be pretty rough, you 
“laif mei bi: priti rAf, ju: 
rough = 
smooth 
know, so don’t make it rougher still by fighting already. 
nou, sou dount meik it rAfa stil bai faitiy o:l'redi. 
And we have so many things to talk about now, too. 
an wi: hav son meni piyz ta to:k a'baut nan, tu:. 
Let’s go inside.” 
lets gou in'said.” 
“Yes, tell us about your plans,” Mr. Edwards said. 
“jes, tel as a'baut jo: plcenz” mistar edwadz sed. 
“I’m afraid our plans for the future haven’t taken any 
“aim a'freid aua plcenz fa da fju:tfa hcevnt teikn eni 
not 
679 
Chapter Fifty-Eight (58). 
shape = form 
pay attention = 
give attention 
definite shape yet,” Storm answered. “We want to 
definit feip jet” sta:m a:nsdd. “wi: wont id 
marry as soon as possible, of course, but it looks to 
niceri az su:n dz posabl, av ko:s, bdt it Inks ta 
me as if that’s a long way off. As far as I can see, 
mi: dz if beets a hy wei o:f. dz fair dzai kan si:, 
we must place all our hope of marrying soon in what 
wi: mast pleis o:l ana houp av mceriiy su:n in hwot 
I’m able to do with my brain.” “So you can under- 
aim eibl ta du: wid mai brein” “sou ju: kan \nda- 
stand what a very small hope it is, father,” Marion 
1 stcend hwot a veri srno:l houp it iz, fa:da” mcerian 
interrupted, laughing. 
inta'rAptid, la:fiy. 
Storm paid no attention to her words, but it was with 
stj:m peid nou a'ten fan ta ha: wa:dz, bat it waz wid 
rather red ears he continued: “What I mean is, I 
ra:da red iaz hi: kan'tinju:d: “hwot ai mi:n iz, ai 
haven’t been blessed with any rich old aunts who will 
hcevnt bi:n blest wid eni ritf ould a:nts hu: wil 
leave me all their money when they die, so what we’ll 
li:v mi: j: 1 dea m\ni hwen dei dai, sou hwot wi:l 
need, I shall have to earn by my own work. However, 
ni:d, ai fal hcev tu a:n bai mai oun wa:k. hau'eva, 
I think that the experience I have been able to gain 
ai piyk bat di iks'piarians ai hav bi:n eibl ta gein 
over here will help me when I return home.” 
ouva hia wil help mi: hwen ai ri l ta:n houm” 
680 
The Fifty-Eighth (58th) Chapter. 
“Return home!” Mrs. Edwards cried. “But that’s 
“ri'ta:n houm!” misiz edwadz kraid. “bdt doets 
entirely out of the question. Isn’t it?” she asked and 
in'taidli aut av da kwestjan. iznt it?” ji: a:skt and 
turned to her husband. “I’m afraid it’s impossible for 
ta:nd ta ha: hAzband. “aim a'freid its im'pasabl fa: 
me to stay much longer,” Storm said. “It makes me 
mi: ta stei mAtf layga” sta:m sed. “it meiks mi: 
very sad, too, to think of leaving England. But now 
veri seed, tu:, ta piyk av li:viy iy gland. bat nau 
I shall have to ‘get rich quick’, as they say in America, 
ai jal licev ta € get ritf kwik\ az dei sei in a'merika, 
and my chance of getting better paid work will be 
an mai tfa:ns av getiy beta peid wa:k wil bi: 
greater at home. And an entirely different thing is 
greitar at houm. and an in'taiali difrant p\y iz 
that my passport says that I can only stay three months 
dat mai. pa:spa:t sez dat ai kan ounli stei pri: m\nps 
longer in England.” “Only three months?” Mrs. Ed- 
hygar in iy gland ." “ounli pri: niAnps?” misiz ed- 
wards asked sadly. “Oh, isn’t there anything you can 
zvadz a:skt sccdli. “on, iznt dar enipiy ju: kan 
do about it? Don’t you know anybody in the police 
du: a'baut it? daunt ju: non enibjdi in da pa'li:s 
department that deals with unwanted foreigners?” 
di'pa:tmant dat di:lz wid '.\n'uuntid farinaz?” 
Mr. Edwards replied, with a little smile at the ex- 
mistar edzvadz ri'plaid. 7aid a lit / sniail at <)i iks- 
entirely = quite 
sad — sorry 
He deals, he dealt, 
he has dealt \di:lz. 
dclt, dclt ]. 
681 
Chapter Fifty-Eight (58). 
as a matter of fact 
— really 
the chief of a 
department = the 
man who is at the 
head of the 
department 
hopeful — full 
of hope 
pression his wife used, “As a matter of fact, I do know 
'prefdn his zvaif ju:sd, “dz a mcetdr av fcekt, ai du: non 
a man there. Jenkins, the chief of that department, 
a mcen bed. d^eykinz, dd tji:f av beet di'pa:tmant, 
is a personal friend of mine. But I can’t very well go 
is a pdisnl frend dv main, bdt ai ka:nt veri zvcl gou 
up there and demand that they should make an ex- 
a p dea an di'ma:nd bat dei fad meik an ik- 
ception to the rules as a personal favour to me, just 
'sepfan ta da ru:lz az a pa:snl feiva ta mi:, d^.xst 
because we would like a certain young man to stay. 
bi'kas wi: wad laik a sa:tn f\y mcen ta stei. 
But there’s nothing to prevent me,” he continued a 
bat daz n\piy ta prevent mi:,” hi: kan'tinju:d a 
little more hopefully, “from sending a personal mes- 
litl ma: houpfuli, “fram sendiy a pa:snt mes¬ 
sage to Jenkins, recommending Storm’s case to his 
id3 ta dyrjkim, rcka'mcndiy sta:mz keis ta his 
kind attention. 
kaind a'tenjan. 
“Now, listen!” he went on, turning to Storm. “You go 
t( nau, lisn!” hi: went an, tarniy ta sta:m. “ju: you 
in and write a letter to the chief of police, saying that 
in an rait a tela ta da tfi:f av pa'li:s, seiiy dal 
you’re doing special and very necessary work here, 
jua du:iy spefal an veri ne sisari wa:k hi a, 
which can't be finished within the three months that 
hwitj ko:nt hi: finift zvid'in da pri: m\nps dal 
682 
The Fifty-Eighth (58th) Chapter. 
you're allowed to stay, and asking for an extra year’s 
juar a'laud ta stei, and a:skit] far an ekstra jiaz 
stay. 
stei. 
“There’s more than sufficient work for you in our firm, 
“daz mo: dan s a'f if ant wa:k fa ju: in ana fa:m, 
so I’ll see that you get chances enough to prove whether 
sou ail si: dat ju: get tfa:nsiz i'nxf ta pru:v hweda 
you can take on more responsibility. If they grant 
ju: kan teik on mo: risponsa'biliti. if dei gra:nt 
you that extra year, and you make good in your work, 
ju: dcet ekstra jia, an ju: meik gud in jo: wa:k, 
you will get a rise, so that you can marry within the 
ju: toil get a raiz, sou dat ju: kan nicer i wid'in da 
coming year. And then next time you ask for per- 
k\miy jia. an den nckst tuini ju: a:sk fa pa- 
mission to extend your stay in England, you’ll have 
1 mifan tu iks'tend jo: stei in iygland, ju:l hcev 
the very good reason to give that you’re married to 
da veri gud ri:zn ta giv dat jua mcerid tu 
an Englishwoman. So run along now and get that letter 
an iyglifwuman. sou r\n a'lay nan on get dcet leta 
done, while I write to Jenkins!” 
d.\n, hivuil ui rail ta djeykinz!" 
“Isn’t it wonderful, the way father can always find 
u iznt it iv\ndaful, da wei fo:da kan odivaz faind 
a way out of difficulties?” Marion said to her mother. 
a wei ant av difikaltiz?” nicerian sed ta ha: m\da. 
make good 
have success 
683 
Chapter Fifty-Eight (58). 
“Yes, dear — there’s certainly nothing wrong with his 
“jes, did — das saitnli nApiy ray wid his 
brain,” Mrs. Edwards answered proudly. 
brein,” misiz edwadz a:nsad praudli. 
An hour later, when the two letters had been sent off, 
an aua leita, hwen da tu: letaz had bi:n sent a:f, 
Marshall arrived. “I thought it best to come out and 
mcr.jal araivd. “ai pa:t it best ta kAm out and 
explain the matter personally,” he said. “What matter?” 
iks'plein da mceta paisnali,” hi: sed. “hwat meet a?” 
Mr. Edwards asked. “Why, about the delays at Ports- 
mistar edwadz a:skt. “hwai, a'baut da di'leiz at pa:ts- 
mouth, sir,” Marshall replied in some surprise. “Oh yes, 
map, sa:” ma:jal ri plaid in sA-m sa'praiz. “ou jes, 
that’s right. I’d forgotten all about that. You see.” he 
dcets rait. aid fa'gatn a:l a'baut dcrt. jn: si:” hi: 
explained, noticing Marshall’s expression, “we’ve just 
iks'pleind, noutisiy ma:falz iks'prefan, “wi:v d$Ast 
learned that Marion is going to marry your friend 
la:nd dat mcerian iz gouiy ta mceri ja: frend 
Storm, so we’ve been far away in making plans for 
sta:m, sou wi:v bi:n fa:r a'wei in meikiy plans fa 
the future.” 
da fju:tfa ” 
“What’s that, old man?” Marshall said to Storm. “Didn’t 
u hwats dat , ould man?” ma:fal sed ta sta:m. (C didnt 
you tell me the other day to guard that piece of news 
ju: tel mi: di \da dei ta ga:d dat pi:s av nju:z 
684 
The Fifty-Eighth (58th) Chapter. 
like the crown jewels?” “I did,” Storm answered. 
laik da kraun dyi:alz?” “cii did” sta:m cr.nsad. 
“But Marion let the cat out of the bag this afternoon.” 
“bat mcerian let da kcet aut dv da bcug dis a:fta'nu:n 
“Aren’t you afraid to send your daughter off with a 
“a:nt ju: a'freid ta send jo: do: tar a:f it 'id a 
foreigner?” Marshall asked Mrs. Edwards. “We hope 
farina?” mcr. jal a:skt misiz edwadz. “zvi: houp 
they’ll be able to stay in England,” she answered, “so 
deil bi: eibl ta stei in iy gland” fi: a:nsad, “sou 
that we can keep an eye on them and guard her against 
dat zvi: kan ki:p an cii an dam an ga:d ha:r a'geinst 
all the strange ideas that he will no doubt try to put 
a:l da streind 3 ai'diaz dat hi: uni non daut trai ta put 
into her head!” 
inta ha: hed!” 
“Well,” said the manager, “what did you find out about 
“wel” sed da mcenid^a, “hwat did ju: faind aut a'baut 
Portsmouth?” “It doesn’t look as if anybody is making 
pa:tsmap?” “it d\znt luk az if enibadi iz meikiy 
any errors down there,” Marshall replied. “All goods 
cni craz daun dea” ma:fal ri' plaid. “a:l gudz 
are sent on very soon after reaching the town.” “Well, 
a: sent an veri su:n a:fta ri:tfiy da taun” “wel, 
did you cable to our connections on the Continent then? 
did ju: keibl tu ana ka'nekfanz an da kantinant den? 
You can’t have received any cables yet from over there.” 
ju: ka:nt hav ri'si:vd eni keiblz jet fram ouva dea” 
685 
Chapter Fifty-Eight (58). 
hunt about 
look for 
.something 
“No, I didn’t cable. You see, I found out that the last 
“non, ai didnt keibl. ju: si:, ai found out dat da la:st 
two or three times the goods have arrived on time. 
fit: a pri: tainiz da gudz hav a'raivd an taim. 
So I got some of these papers that deal only with 
sou ai gat SAm av di:z peipaz dat di:l ounli zvid 
ships; you know — the sailing plans of all ships, news 
fips; ju: nou — da seiliy plcniz av a:l fips, nju:z 
about the weather, and so on. And it seems that by 
a'baut da zveda, an sou an. and it si:mz dat bai 
a strange chance, four of the ships bound for Portsmouth 
a strcind 3 tfa.ns, fa:r av da fips bound fa pa:tswap 
with our goods on board have had several days’ delay 
zvid ana gudz an ba:d hav Jncd sevral deiz di'Jei 
on account of bad weather and a rough sea. The fellow 
an a'haunt av beed zvedar and a r\f si:. da felou 
down there who had dealt with our things was very 
daun dr a hu: had delt zvid aua piyz zvaz veri 
helpful; it was he who suggested that I should try those 
helpful: it zvaz hi: hu: sa'd^cstid dat ai fad troi douz 
papers.” “Good!” the manager said. “I think it was 
peipaz ” “ gud /” da mcenid^a sed. “ai pitjh it zvaz 
(here) 
wise of you to hunt about a bit before sending cables 
zvaiz av ju: ta h.\nt a'baut a bit In fa: sen dig heiblz 
all over the Continent.” 
a:l ouva da kantinant 
Marshall and Storm stayed with the Edwards family 
mu.fal and sta:m steid zvid di edzvadz fcemili 
686 
The Fifty-Eighth (58th) Chapter. 
for dinner, and naturally, the conversation turned to 
fa dina, and ncrtfrali, da kanva'scifan ta:nd ta 
the subject of ships. “I’ve visited Portsmouth several 
da SAbdykt av fips. “aiv vizitid pa:tsmap scvral 
times,” Marshall said, “and I think it would be hard 
taiinz” ma:fal sed, (< and ai pifjk it wad bi: haul 
to find another harbour with so many types of ships 
ta faind a'n\da ha:ba wid sou meni taips av fips 
in one place. The entire harbour is full of all kinds entire -- whole 
in wah pleis. di in'taia ha:bar iz ful av o:l kaindz 
of ships.” “You know,” Mr. Edwards explained to 
av fips." %i ju: non" mistar edwadz iks'pleind ta 
Storm, “Portsmouth is one of the most important bases 
st arm, (( pa:tsrnap iz wah av da moust ini' pa: taut beisiz 
for British warships. In fact, it has been so ever since 
fa britif %va:fips. in fcvkt, it haz bi:n sou cva sins 
Roman times, for the shape of the South Coast makes 
rouman taimz , fa da feip av da saup koust mciks 
a fine natural harbour here. Within this natural harbour, 
a fain ncctjral ha:ba hia. ivid'in dis ncctfral ha:ba, 
two harbours have been built, one for warships and 
tu: lurbaz hav bi:n bill, iv\n fa to a: fips an 
one for other ships.” 
WAn far Ada fips ” 
“And outside the harbour,” Marshall added, “is the 
iC and 'aut'said da Jia:ba” ma:fal cedid, u iz da 
place for all the small boats owned by the people who 
pleis far a:l da sma:l bouts ound bai da pi:pl hu: 
687 
Chapter Fifty-Eight (58). 
stay there in the summer. I’ve been there on a summer 
stci be dr in dd sauio. aiv bi:n dedr on d SAind 
battleship ~ 
warship 
day, and it really was a wonderful sight: great battle- 
dr/, dnd it ridli zvoz o zvAnddful salt: greit bcetl - 
ships and small, all painted grey, aircraft carriers with 
fips on srno:l, o:I peintid grei. eokra'.ft kceriaz zvid 
mcFaft 
their broad white decks for aeroplanes, or aircraft, to 
bed bro:d hwait deks fdr edrdpleinz, o:r eokra:ft, td 
carrier 
land on, black steamers, aeroplanes starting from and 
Icend on , blcek sti:moz, edrdpleinz sta:tiy from on 
landing on the aircraft carriers, and moving in and out 
lerndiy on bi eokra:ft kccridz . on nneviy in ond ant 
aeroplane 
or aircraft 
among all these, there were many small boats with 
d'niAy o:l bi:z, bed zvo: mcni smo:l bouts zvib 
one aircraft 
two aircraft 
their white sails bright in the sun. We saw a great 
bed hzvait seilz brait in bd sail zvi: so: o greit 
white steamer far out at sea, too. Somebody said it 
hzvait sti:me fa:r aut ot si:, tu:. sAwbedi sed it 
was the ‘Queen Mary’. It’s strange to think that they 
zvdz bd ( kzvi:n meori\ its streind$ to piyk bot bei 
accommodate ~ 
have room for 
can now build ships large enough to accommodate several 
kon nan bild fips lu:d$ i'n\f tu o'koniodrif sevrol 
thousand passengers and sailors.” 
pauzond pccsind^oz on seiloz” 
“That’s enough people to fill a small town,” Storm 
<( bcets i'liAf pi:pl to fil o smo:l taun” sto:m 
said. “But, of course, that’s unusual. The boat I came 
sed. “bat, av ko:s, beets An'jn.^udl. bo bout ai keim 
688 
The Fifty-Eighth (58th) Chapter. 
over in accommodated 300, one of the sailors 
ouvdr in d'komddeitid pri: h\ndrdd, wah dv dd seildz 
told me. — What a crowd there must be to see all see off = say 
tould mi:. — hwot d kraud dea mast bi: td si: o:l ^ 00ci to 
those passengers off!” he added, thinking of all the 
douz pcesindyz o:f!” hi: cedid, pitjkiy av o:l da 
people who had been there last year to see their friends 
pi:pi hu: hdd bi:n ded la:st jid td si: ded frendz 
off when he left the Continent. 
o:f hwen hi: left dd kontinant. 
After dinner they passed a pleasant hour in front of 
a:ftd dina del pa:st d plesnt audr in frAnt dv 
the fire, as it had grown a bit cool in the evening. 
dd faid, dz it hdd groun d bit ku:l in di i:vniy. 
When they rose to leave, Marion decided to walk with 
hwcn del rouz td li:v, mcerian di'saidid td wo:k wid 
them to the bus. “Wait a moment!” she called to them 
ddin td dd 1 ?as. “weit d mounidnt!” fi: ko:ld td ddin 
from the stairs, while they were saying good-bye to 
fram dd stedz, hivail dei wd: seiiy gud'bai td 
Mr. and Mrs. Edwards. “I just want to get my 
mist-dr dnd misiz edwddz. “ai d$Ast wont td get mcii 
coat and a cap.” 
bout dnd d keep” 
“What! A new hat again?” cried her father, as she 
({ hwjt! d nju: hcct d'gein?” kraid hd: fa:dd, dz fi: 
appeared again with a bright green cap. “It’s not a 
d'pidd d'gein wid d. brait gri:n keep. “its ndt d 
689 
Chapter Fifty-Eight (58). 
hat, daddy, it’s a cap, and I made it myself, so it hasn’t 
heel, deedi, its a keep, and ai meid it mai'self, sou it heeznt 
even cost you a shilling.” 
i:van hast ju: a filiy” 
“Be careful now, my boy,” Mr. Edwards said to Storm 
“bi: keaful nau, mai boi,” rnistar edwadz sed ta sta:m 
with a smile. “You see, she’s trying to give you the 
wid a smail. “ju: si:, fi:z traiitj ta giv ju: di 
impression that she’s a great little woman for saving 
im'prefan dat fi:z a greit litl zvuman fa seiviy 
money. But don’t trust her! Keep her under your 
m\ni. bat donut trASt ha:! ki:p ha:r Anda jo: 
thumb right from the beginning. It’s the only way to 
pAin rait frain da bi'giniy. its di ounli ivei ta 
make good wives of them.” “Is it?” asked Mrs. Edwards. 
meik gud waivz av dam ” “is it?" a:skt misis cdivadz. 
“Perhaps I should tell Marion how I made a good 
“pa'keeps ai fad tel nicerian hau ai mcid a gud 
husband of you?” “It’s very kind of you to call me 
JiAzband av ju:?” “its veri kaind av ju: ta ka:l mi: 
that,” her husband answered with a laugh. “But per- 
deet” ha: JiAzband a:nsad wid a la:f. “bat pa- 
hangs you had better not. It might make him afraid.” 
'keeps ju: had beta not. it mait incik him a'freid” 
At last they all said good-night again, and the three 
at la:st dei j .7 sed gud'nait a'gein, and da pri: 
young people left the house. 
)avj pi: pi left da haus. 
690 
The Fifty-Eighth (58th) Chapter. 
EXERCISE A. 
Mr. Edwards — to know why there was such a great 
— at Portsmouth. He wanted Marshall to send a — 
to Portsmouth, and perhaps also — to their connections 
on the Continent. Storm — up Marshall and gave him 
the — from the manager, and Marshall answered that 
he would ask a man at the customs office, who was a 
— friend of his, to help them to find out where the 
— was. 
Young women nowadays no longer need their parents’ 
— to marry, but Mr. Edwards would gladly have — 
Marion permission to marry Storm. He told Storm 
that he had often made the — that it was necessary 
to use a strong hand with women. Marion had for 
some time tried to — Storm from talking about mar¬ 
rying her, but at last he got his chance. 
When Mrs. Edwards asked her husband if he had not 
noticed anything, he — his head instead of saying “no”. 
Mr. Edwards knew how to use his — in his work, but 
he said that his wife was much — than he was. Storm’s 
and Marion’s plans for the future had not taken — yet. 
It made Mrs. Edwards very — to think that Storm 
must leave them soon, but her husband told her that 
he knew the — of the — department that — with 
foreigners staying in England. He would tell him that 
Storm’s special work could not be finished — three 
months. Storm had told Marshall to — the news about 
Marion and him like the crown jewels. 
WORDS: 
demand 
police 
delay 
chief of police 
chief 
personal 
message 
deal 
dealt 
wise 
unwanted 
prevent 
brain 
guard 
ring up 
observation 
permission 
error 
wire 
cable 
cable (verb) 
entire 
see off 
sad 
hopeful 
warship 
battleship 
land (verb) 
rough 
grant 
helpful 
shape 
aircraft carrier 
aircraft 
16/3 
691 
Chapter Fifty-Eight (58). 
aeroplane 
base 
accommodate 
bless 
cap 
shake 
shook 
shaken 
wonderful 
within 
bag 
Portsmouth is one of the most important — for Bri¬ 
tish —.-are ships with a broad deck for — to — 
upon. When people go away on trips, their friends 
usually come to — them —. Marion herself had made 
the — which she wore that evening. 
EXERCISE B. 
Have you ever had anything to do with the police? ... 
Have you ever been up in an aeroplane? ... What is 
an aircraft carrier? ... Have you ever been out in a 
bad snow storm? ... Have you ever visited a foreign 
country? ... At what time of the year did you go there? 
... What was the weather like? ... What was the pur¬ 
pose of your visit to that country? ... 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
Shall and will are used with the infinitive of a verb 
to make the future tense. Examples: I shall come to¬ 
morrow. When will your uncle come? I should be 
glad to see you this evening. He would write me a 
letter as soon as possible. 
Shall and should are generally used after ‘I’ and ‘we’, 
and as a rule will and would are used after ‘you’, ‘he’ 
(‘she’, ‘it’, and a noun in the singular), ‘you’, and 
‘they’ (and a noun in the plural). For instance: I shall 
692 
The Fifty-Eighth (58th) Chapter. 
write my exercise to-morrow. Will you go with me 
to town to-morrow? He will soon learn how to speak 
this language. If you would come to-morrow, we should 
be glad to receive you. They would have given him 
the money gladly. 
Questions: 
How is the future tense made? ... Which verb is used 
after C P and ( we’ in the future tense? ... Which verb 
is used after ‘you’, ‘he’ (‘she’, ‘it’, and a noun in the 
singular), ‘they 5 (and a noun in the plural)? ... Write 
four sentences in the future tense. ... 
693 
Chapter Fifty-Nine (59). 
The Fifty-Ninth (59th) Chapter. 
NEW FRIENDS 
A few weeks after Storm and Mr. Edwards had written 
a fju: u'i:ks a:fta sta:m and mistar edwadz had ritn 
to the police to get permission for Storm to stay, 
ta da pa'li:s ta get pa'mifan fa sta:m ta stei, 
Mr. Jenkins rang up and told Mr. Edwards that he 
mista d^eykinz rcey .\p and tould mistar edwadz dat hi: 
had been able to arrange everything: Storm might stay 
had bi:n eibl tu a'reind$ evripiy: starm mait stei 
on for another year. 
an far a'nAda jia. 
So Marion and Marshall and a small number of other 
sou mcerian and ma:fal and a sma:l nAmbar av a da 
young people, friends of Marion’s and Marshall’s, and 
jAy pi:pi, frendz av mcerianz and ma:falz, and 
now Storm’s friends, too, decided that they had better 
nan sta:mz frendz, tu:, di'saidid dat dei had beta 
‘do something about his education’, as they expressed 
Ulu: SAmpiy a'baut hiz cdju:'keijan\ az dei iks'prest 
it, and teach him everything he ought to know about 
it, and ti:tf him evripiy hi: a:t ta nou a'baut 
the country and its people in order to become a true 
da kAntri and its pi:pi in a:da ta bi'kAm a tru: 
Englishman. 
iyglijman. 
694 
The Fifty-Ninth (59th) Chapter. 
It all started in fun, of course, but they soon became 
it a:l sta.tid in f\n, av ka:s f bat dei su:n bi'keim 
really interested in this ‘education business 5 . When- 
riali intristid in dis c edju:'keifan biznishwen- 
ever possible, they went in the evenings to hear English 
'eva pasabl, dei went in di i:vniyz ta hiar iyglif 
men of science speak about different subjects in which 
men av saians spi:k a'baut difrant sAbd^ikts in hwitj 
they were interested — natural history, for instance. 
dei iva:r intristid — ncetfral histari, far instans. 
Afterwards, they would go either to Marshall’s or to 
a:ftawadz, dei wad gou aidfa ta ma:jalz o: ta 
Marion’s home and have long arguments about what 
nicerianz houm and hcev lag a:gjumants a'baut hwat 
they had heard. At first, the tea-table would be ready 
dei had ha:d. at fa:st, da ti:teibl wad bi: redi 
for them when they arrived, but soon the visits grew 
fa: dam hwen dei a'raivd, bat su:n da vizits gru: 
so frequent that Mrs. Marshall and Mrs. Edwards had 
sou fri:kwant dat misiz ma.fal and misiz edwadz heed 
to let them boil the water, make the tea, and lay the 
ta let dam bail da wa:ta, meik da ti:, and lei da 
tea-table themselves. They all helped gladly, of course, 
ti'.tcibl dam'selvz. dei a:l helpt glcedli, av ka:s, 
and so on these evenings the house was filled with 
and sou an di:z i'.vniyz da haus waz fild wid 
young voices in hot argument from kitchen to dining- 
j\y vaisiz in hat a:gjumant fram kitfin ta dainiy- 
afterwards = 
after this 
695 
Chapter Fifty-Nine (59). 
curtain 
circle 
semi-circle 
He dreams, he 
dreamt, he has 
dreamt [dri:mz, 
dremt, dremt]. 
rocks 
healthy = in good 
health 
room. On such nights, they would draw the curtains, 
rum. on sAtf naits, dei wdd dro: da kaitnz, 
put out the electric light in the middle of the room, 
put aut di i'lektrik lait in da midi av da ru:m, 
and sit in a semi-circle in front of the fire, talking 
and sit in a semisa:kl in frAnt av da faia, taikiy 
about different subjects, with only the circle of yellow 
a'bant d if rant SAbdykts, zvid ounli da sa:kl av jelou 
light shed by a small lamp over the fire-place. They 
lait fed bai a small Icemp ouva da faiapleis. dei 
would sometimes be lost in thought, dreaming wonder- 
zvad SAmtaimz bi: last in fait, driimiy zvAnda- 
ful dreams about the future. 
fitl driirnz a'baut da fjuitfa. 
Mr. Edwards was very pleased with all this. Like 
mistar edzvadz zvaz veri pliizd zvid ail dis. laik 
most fathers, he had tried with many wise arguments 
monst faidaz, hi: had traid zvid meni zvaiz aigjumants 
to show his daughter that knowledge is the rock upon 
ta fou hiz da :ta dat nalid$ iz da rak a* pan 
which young people should build their future. And 
hzvitf jAij piipl fad bild dea fjuitfa . and 
Marion had, like most healthy girls, said “Yes, father”, 
nuerian heed, laik moust helpi gailz, sed <( jes, faida 3 \ 
and then afterwards forgotten all about it. She had 
and den aiftazvadz fa'gain ail a'baut it. fii had 
dreamt again her own rosy dreams, in which she would 
dremt a'gein hair oun rouzi driimz, in hzvitf fi: zvad 
696 
The Fifty-Ninth (59th) Chapter. 
always, through some happy chance, be c on top of the 
a:lwaz, pru: s\m hcepi tfa:ns, bi: ‘an top av da 
world’ like an eagle on a rock. 
wa:ld* laik an i:gl an a rak. 
She would see herself in the theatre, perhaps, standing 
ji: wad si: ha:'self in da piata, pa'keeps, steendiy 
in front of the curtain with her arms full of flowers, 
in fr\nt av da ka:tn wid ha:r a:ms ful av flauas, 
smiling across the hundreds of electric lights at her 
smailiy a'kras da hAndrads av i'lektrik laits at ha: 
feet to a house full of shouting and admiring people. 
fi:t tu a haus ful av fautiy and ad'maiariy pi:pi. 
Or she would paint beautiful pictures, and crowds 
a: fi: wad peint bju:taful piktfaz, and krauds 
would come to admire her art. 
wad kxm tu ad'maia ha:r a:t. 
“She’s learning quite a different art now,” her wise 
“fi:z la:niy kzvciit a difrant a:t nan” ha: zvais 
mother thought to herself, when she saw the interest 
mAda pa:t ta ha:'self, hwen fi: sa: di intrist 
with which Marion took part in the discussions, “the 
wid hwitf meerian tuk pa:t in da dis'kAfanz, “di 
art of living in a world full of plain facts, and liking it.” 
a:t av liviy in a zva:ld ful av plein feekts, an laikiy it ” 
Mrs. Edwards even had to stop the girl now and 
misiz edwadz i:van heed ta stap da ga:l nau and 
then. She had begun to hurry through her meals in 
den. fi: had bi'gAn ta hAri pru: ha: mi:Is in 
eagle 
697 
Chapter Fifty-Nine (59). 
chief = most 
important 
order to get on with some interesting study or other, 
o:da ta get on wid saih intristiy stAdi o:r a da, 
as if she thought eating a waste of time. 
az if fi: po:t i:tiy a weist av taim. 
“Be careful, child! You’re healthy enough now, but if 
“bi: keaful, tfoild! jua helpi i'nAp nau, bat if 
you keep up that speed, you’ll make yourself ill.” 
ju: ki:p Ap dcet spi:d, ju:l meik jo:'self il” 
“Let her work, my dear,” her husband said, “it won’t 
(( let ha: wa:k , mai dia 33 ha: hAzband sed, “it ivount 
last very long. As soon as she has to start arranging 
la:st. veri log. az su:n az fi: hcez ta sta:t a'reindyy 
everything regarding their home, her interests will be 
evripiy ri'ga:diy dea houm , ha:r intrists wil bi: 
divided more equally between study and other kinds 
di'vaidid mo:r i:kwali bi'twi:n stAdi and Ada kciindz 
of work. The chief thing is that she’s learning to use 
av wa:k. da tfi:f piy iz dat fi:z la:niy ta jn:z 
her brain now and not just dreaming away her time.” 
ha: brein nau an not d^Ast dri:miy a'wei ha: taim ” 
“I do hope you’re right,” Mrs. Edwards said. “I am, 
“ai du: houp jua rait, 33 misiz edwadz sed . “ai cem, 
my dear, you may be sure of that,” her husband 
mai dia, ju: mei bi: fuar av dcet, 33 ha: hAzband 
answered. “Her chief reason for this sudden interest 
a.nsad. “ha: tfi:f ri:zn fa dis SAdn intrist 
in science is, in plain words, that she doesn’t want her 
in saians iz, in plein wa:dz, dat fi: dAznt wont ha: 
698 
The Fifty-Ninth (59th) Chapter. 
future husband to think her too foolish.” 
fju:tfa liAzband ta fiyk ha: tu: fu:lif” 
On a fine day at the beginning of October, a party 
an a fain dei at da biginiy av ak'touba, a pa:ti 
consisting of the usual small group of friends had gone 
kan'sistiy av da ju:^nal sma:l gru:p av frends had gan 
into the country for the week-end. They had decided 
inta da kAntri fa da 'wi:k'end. dei had di'saidid 
to stay the night at a village about 20 miles from 
ta stei da nait at a vilid 3 a'baut twenti mails fram 
London, and from there to go for walks in the woods 
Lxndan, and fram dea ta gou fa wa:ks in da wudz 
and the surrounding country. 
and da sa'raundirj kAntri. 
As soon as they had had their tea on Saturday, 
az su:n az dei had heed dea ti: an scetadi, 
they started out for their first walk from the village, 
dei sta:tid aut fa dea fa:st wa:k fram da vilid 3, 
although the sun was already low in the western sky. 
a:l'dou da SAn waz a:Vredi lou in da westan skai. 
“Let's sit on the grass a bit and watch the sun setting,” 
“lets sit an da gra:s a bit an watf da SAn setiy” 
Marion suggested, when they reached a small hill. 
mcerian sa'd^estid, hzven dei ri.tjt 3 sma:l hil. 
“Oh, it's wonderful!” she cried. “I wish I could paint 
“ou, its WAndaful!” fi: kraid. “ai wif ai kad peint 
it all — the wood, the small groups of trees in the 
it a:l — da wud, da sma:l gru:ps av tri:z in da 
group = a 
number of persons 
or objects 
village = a very 
small town in the 
country 
699 
Chapter Fifty-Nine (59). 
fields, the village!” 
fi’.ldz, da vilid 3/" 
“There, there, don’t be sorry, Marion. I’ll buy you a 
“be a, bed, dount hi: sort, mcerian. ail bai ju: a 
nice picture post-card when we get back.” “You’re 
nais piktjd poustka:d hzven wi: get bcek” “juar 
impossible,” Marion laughed. “Well, there’s nothing 
im'pasabl,” mcerian la: ft. “wel, daz nApiy 
left of the sun now. Shall we go on?” “Have you 
left av da s\n nau. fal wi: gou an?” “liav ju: 
noticed that there are hardly any birds left now?” 
noutist dat dea ha:dli eni ba:dz left nauf” 
Storm asked as they rose to go. “At least you don’t 
sta:m a:skt az dei rouz ta gou . “at li:st ju: dount 
hear any birds singing.” “That’s because it’s autumn,” 
hiar eni ba:dz siyiy” (C beets bi'kaz its a:tam,” 
Marion replied. “There are still many birds that 
mcerian ri'plaid. (( dea stil meni ba:dz bat 
haven’t left the country yet, but they don’t sing in the 
hcevnt left da kAntri jet, bat dei dount siy in di 
autumn.” “Marshall!” she suddenly cried. “Where 
a:tam.” “ma:fal!” fi: SAdnli kraid. {( hwear 
are you taking us?” “Into this field,” he answered 
a: ju: teikiy as V 3 u inta bis fi:ldhi: a:nsad 
and began to open a big gate. “What’s the matter? 
and bi'gcen tu oupan a big geit. “hwats da mcetaf 
Are you afraid of the cows?” “They do have such 
a: ju: a'freid av da kauz?” “dei du: heev SAtf 
700 
The Fifty-Ninth (59th) Chapter. 
very big horns,” she replied. “Yes, couldn’t we go 
veri big ho:nz,” fi : ri'plaid. “jes, kudnt zvi: gou 
another way?” asked Ellen, Marion’s friend. “I don’t 
a'nAda zvei?” a:skt elin, mcerianz frcnd. “ai dount 
like the look of those horns, either.” “But this is 
laik da luk av douz ha:nz, aid a” <c bat dis iz 
the more direct way,” he said. “We don’t like going 
da mo: di'rekt zvei,” hi: sed. “zvi: dount laik gouiy 
that way, do we, Ellen?” Marion answered. “I’m 
dost zvei, du: zvi:, elin?” mcerian a:nsad. “aim 
sure those cows are going to start running towards 
fua douz kauz a: gouiy ta sta:t rAniy ta'zvo:dz 
us the moment we’re inside the gate.” “All right — 
as da mourn ant zviar in'said da geit.” “o:l rait — 
I give up, then!” Marshall said. 
ai giv Ap, den!” ma:fal sed. 
Half an hour later they were back in the village. It 
ha:f an aua leita dei zva: bcek in da vilid 3. it 
was still too pleasant out of doors to go inside, so 
zvaz stil tu: pleznt aut av do:z ta gou in'said, sou 
they decided to walk about the village and look at 
dei di'saidid ta zvo:k a'baut da vilid 3 and luk at 
the houses, some of which were very old. 
da hauziz, SAm av hzvitj zva: veri ould. 
“It’s strange to think,” Storm said to the others, pointing 
“its streind 3 ta piyk,” sto:m sed ta di a daz, pointiy 
out an old house with a beautiful old door, “how much 
aut an ould haus zvid a bju:taful ould da:, “hau mAtf 
701 
Chapter Fifty-Nine (59). 
spent (here) = 
used 
money and work was spent in the old days to make 
niAni an wa:k wdz spent in di ould deiz td meik 
the houses beautiful. Look at this door, for example. 
da hauziz bju:taful. Ink at dis da:, far ig'za.mpl. 
And yet they did nothing at all to make their houses 
an jet dei did nApirj at o:l ta meik dea hauziz 
healthy to live in. They didn't even have drains to 
helpi ta liv in. dei didnt i:van hav dreinz ta 
take the dirty water away from the houses, but just 
teik da da:ti wa:tar a'wei fram da hauziz , bat d^Ast 
threw it out of the windows into the streets or the 
pru: it aut av da windouz inta da stri:ts a: da 
gardens.” 
ga.dnz. 33 
“And so, of course,” said Hardy, Ellen's brother, “many 
“an sou, av ka:s, 33 sed ha:di, elinz brAda, “meni 
people died every year of all the diseases that are the 
pi:pi daid evri jia av a:l da di'zi:ziz dat a: da 
consequences of dirty people living in dirty houses. 
kansikwansiz av da:ti pi: pi livirj in da:ti hauziz. 
In the East, those special diseases are still very common. 
in di i:st, douz spejal di'zi:ziz a: stil veri kaman. 
But even in many countries in Europe, you’re almost 
bat i:van in meni k\ntriz in juarap, juar a:lmoust 
sure to get typhoid fever if you drink water that 
fua ta get taifaid fi:va if ju: driyk wa:ta dat 
hasn't been boiled first.” 
hceznt bi:n baild fa:st.” 
702 
The Fifty-Ninth (59th) Chapter. 
“What a lot of trouble!” Marion said. “You would 
“knot a lat av tr\bl!” mcerian sed. ¥ ju: wad 
think that it would be much less trouble to clean up 
piyk dat it wad bi: niAtj les tr\bl ta kli:n a p 
those places and have drains from all the houses, or 
douz pleisiz an hav dreinz fram a:l da hauziz, o: 
whatever it is that needs to be done.” “You say this 
hwat'evar it iz dat ni:dz ta bi: d\n” “ju: sei dis 
almost as if you would like to do it yourself,” Storm 
a.lmoust az if ju: wad laik ta du: it ja: 1 self” sta:m 
said with a smile at her serious face. “I would,” she 
sed wid a smciil at ha: siarias feis. “cii wud” ji: 
answered. “Only I should be afraid to go to the 
ci:nsad . “ounli cii fad bi: a'freid ta gou ta di 
East and perhaps get one of those diseases myself. 
i:st an pa'hceps get wah av douz dtzi'.ziz mai'self. 
My father has a friend who got malaria when he was 
max fa:da liaz a frend hu: gat ma'learia hwen hi: waz 
in India, and he still gets very ill at times, when the 
in indja, an hi: stil gets veri il at taimz, hwen da 
fever is ‘burning his brains out’, as he says. — But 
fi.var iz ‘barmy hiz breinz aut y , az hi: sez. — bat 
let’s talk about something a little more pleasant,” she 
lets ta:k a'baut SAmpiy a litl ma: pleznt,” fi: 
continued. “Shall we go in and have our supper 
kan l tinju:d. “fal wi: gou in an hcev aua SApa 
now?” 
nau?” 
703 
Chapter Fifty-Nine (59). 
“Yes, let’s go in,” Ellen said. “I’d like to put on another 
“jes, lets gou in” elm .. sed . “aid laik td put on a'nAda 
pair of shoes. I was foolish enough to go walking in 
pear av ju:z. ai waz fu:lif i'nAf ta gou waikirj in 
new shoes, and, of course, they’re still too tight to be 
nju: fu:z, and, av ka:s, dea stil tu: tait ta bi: 
comfortable. The consequence is that my feet hurt.” 
kAmfatabl. da konsikwans iz dat mai fi:t ha:t” 
“Isn’t that just like girls? Why don’t you buy shoes 
“iznt dcet d$Ast laik ga:lzf hwai dount ju: bai fu:z 
that are big enough?” her brother asked. “If you 
dat a: big i'nAf?” ha: brAdar a:skt. “if ju: 
can’t spread your toes a bit in new shoes, you may 
ka:nt spred jo: touz a bit in nju: ju:z, ju: mei 
be sure that they’re too tight to be comfortable.” 
bi: fua dat dea tu: tait ta bi: kAinfatabl ” 
“There he goes again,” Ellen laughed. “Really, you 
“dea hi: gouz a'gein” elin la:ft. “riali, ju: 
should have been a doctor, I think — always talking 
fad hav bi:n a dokta, ai pifjk — o:lwaz to:kirj 
about diseases and what’s good for you and what isn’t. 
a'baut di'zi:ziz an hwots gud fa ju: an hwot iznt . 
You’ll be pleased to hear,” she said to the other young 
ju:l bi: pli:zd ta hia” ji: sed ta di Ada jAtj 
men, “that he has found out that beer is good for the 
men, “dat hi: haz found aut dat biar iz gud fa da 
stomach.” 
stAmak” 
704 
The Fifty-Ninth (59th) Chapter. 
“That’s right,” Hardy explained in a serious voice. 
“dcets rait” ha:di iks'pleind in a siarias vois. 
“You see, when I was younger I didn’t drink beer ...” 
“ju: si:, hwen ai was jAgga ai didnt driyk bia . . .” 
“Father wouldn’t let him,” Ellen interrupted, smiling. 
“fa: da wudnt let him” elin inta'rAptid, smailitj. 
“He thought it was a waste of money.” “I had a lot 
“hi: po:t it waz a weist av m\ni“ai heed a lot 
of trouble with my digestion, then,” he went on. 
av trAbl wid mai di'd^estfan, den” hi: went on. 
“No doubt because you were always filling yourself 
“nou daut bi'koz ju: wa:r o:lwaz filirj jo:'self 
with sweets,” she interrupted again. “... but now 
wid swi:ts, 33 fi: inta'rAptid a'gein. “. .. bat nau 
that I have begun to drink beer,” he continued, paying 
dat ai hav bi'gAn ta driyk bia/ 3 hi: kan'tinju:d, peiirj 
no attention to her, “there’s nothing the matter with 
nou a'ten fan ta ha:, “daz nApirj da meet a wid 
me any more.” “Perhaps not with your digestion,” 
mi: eni mo:. 33 “pa'hceps not wid jo: di'd^estjan/ 3 
Ellen said, “but I believe that I have seen you when 
elin sed, “bat ai bi'li:v dat ai hav si:n ju: hwen 
your beer was giving you a bit of trouble — ‘tight’ 
jo: bia waz givirj ju: a bit av trAbl — c tait y 
or ‘drunk’, I would have called you.” “What is 
o: ‘ drAyk ’, ai wad hav ko:ld ju:. 33 “hwot iz 
my crime,” the poor fellow cried at last, “that I 
mai kraim/ 3 da pua felon braid at la:st, “dat ai 
705 
Chapter Fifty-Nine (59). 
should be punished by having such a sister?” “Peace, 
fad bi: pAnift bai hceviy s\tf a sista?” “pi'-s, 
children!” laughed Storm. “Let’s all have a glass of 
tjildran!” la:ft sto:m. “lets o:l hcev a gla:s av 
beer and see if that won’t make her a little gentler 
bia an si: if dcet wount meik ha:r a litl d^entla 
with you.” 
wid ju:” 
He called the waitress and ordered their beer. “We 
hi: ka:ld da weitris and a: dad dea bia. “wi: 
fix = arrange 
haven’t fixed anything about our rooms yet. How 
hcevnt fikst enipiy a'bant ana ru:mz jet. hau 
much do you charge for rooms here?” he asked her, 
tnAtf du: ju: tfa:d 3 fa ru:mz hia?” hi: a:skt ha:, 
when she brought the beer. “Single rooms nine 
hwen ji: bro:t da bia. “siygl ru:mz nain 
shillings, double rooms fifteen shillings,” she replied. 
filiyz, dAbl ru:mz fifti:n filiyz/' fi: ri plaid. 
“We’d better take single rooms,” he said. 
“wi:d beta teik siygl ru:mz,” hi: sed. 
They sat for some time talking and watching the other 
del scet fa SAm taim ta:kiy and watjiy di Ada 
guests in the room; but as they were all rather tired, 
gests in da ru:m; bat az dei wa:r o:l ra:da taiad, 
they soon went up to bed. 
dei sum went Ap ta bed. 
Next morning they were up early, so that they might 
nekst rnamiy dei wa:r Ap a:li, sou dat dei mait 
706 
The Fifty-Ninth (59th) Chapter. 
have a long day for their walk. “I heard you had 
hcev a loy dei fa dea wa:k. “ai ha:d ju: had 
trouble with your feet last night,” the waitress said 
trAbl wid jo: fi:t la:st nait,” da weitris sed 
to Ellen, when she was bringing their breakfast. “Are 
tu elin, hwen fi: was briyiy dea brekfast. “a: 
they better to-day?” “As a matter of fact, they aren’t,” 
dei beta ta'dei?” “az a mcetar av fcekt, dei a:nt” 
Ellen replied. “They hurt me even if I touch them 
elin ri plaid. “dei ha:t mi: i:van if ai t\tf dam 
with my fingers.” 
wid mai fiygaz” 
“I thought that might be the case, so I’ve brought a 
“ai po:t dcet mait bi: da keis, sou aiv bro:t a 
small bottle of some oil that I always use. Waitresses 
smo:l botl av sam oil dat ai o:lwaz ju:z. weitrisiz 
often have trouble with their feet, you know. Just rub 
o:fn hav trAbl wid dea fi:t, ju: nou. d$ASt rAb 
a little oil into the skin of your feet, and they will 
a litl oil into da skin av jo: fi:t, an dei wil 
feel much better.” “Thanks! That’s very kind of you, 
fi:l mAtf beta ” “pceyks! dcets veri kaind av ju: f 
I’m sure. It’s no fun walking when your feet give 
aim jua. its nou fAn wo:kiy hwen jo: fi:t giv 
you pain.” 
ju: pein” 
In the afternoon, when they were returning from their 
in di a:fta'nu:n, hwen dei wa: ri'ta:niy from dea 
707 
Chapter Fifty-Nine (59). 
long walk, they met a group of about 20 people, 
by wo:k, dei met a gru:p av a'baut twenti pi:pi, 
all carrying bags or baskets full of different plants 
o:l kceriiy bcegz o: ba:skits ful dv difrant pla:nts 
that they had picked in the fields or the woods. “I 
dat dei had pikt in da fi:lds o: da wudz. “ai 
wonder who they are,” Storm said to Marion. “They 
WAnda hu: dei asta:m sed ta mcerian. “dei 
all seem to be workers, except that tall man over there; 
o:l si:m ta bi: wa:kaz, ik'sept dcet ta:l mean ouva dea; 
but at the same time they look like a class of school- 
bat at da seim taim dei luk laik a kla:s av sku:l- 
children who are out studying natural history with 
tfildran hu: a:r aut stAdiiy ncetjral histari wid 
their teacher.” “Perhaps they're both,” Marion replied. 
dea ti:tfa” “pa'heaps dea boup” mcerian ri'plaid. 
“You see, several of our universities send out travelling 
“jit: si:, sevral av aua ju:ni'va:sitiz send aut treevliy 
teachers all over the country. If a sufficiently large 
ti.tjaz o:l ouva da kAntri. if 3 sa'fifantli la:d 3 
number of people in a town wish to take up one or 
nAinbar av pi:pi in a taun wif ta teik a p WAn 0 : 
more subjects of study and are willing to work 
mo: SAbdykts av stAdi and a: wiliy ta wa:k 
seriously, one of the universities arrange to send a 
siariasli, WAn av da ju:ni'va:sitiz a'reind 3 ta send a 
teacher to them. They’re charged nothing for this, as 
ti:tfa tu dam. dea tfa:d^d nApiy fa dis, az 
708 
The Fifty-Ninth (59th) Chapter. 
the teacher is paid by the university. Many people, 
da ti:tfar iz peid bai da ju:ni'va:siti. meni pi:pl, 
for whom it would be impossible to study at a university, 
fa hu:m it wad bi: im'posabl ta stAdi at a ju:ni'va:siti, 
have been able to take up some study in this way and 
hav bi:n eibl ta teik Ap sam stAdi in dis wei an 
have gained really useful knowledge of their subject.” 
hav geind riali ju:sful nolid 3 av dea SAbd^ikt” 
“What a fine idea!” Storm said. “It gives work to 
“hwot a fain ai'dia!” sto:m sed. “it givz wa:k ta 
men of science as teachers, and it gives some idea of 
men av saians az ti:tjaz, and it givz sam ai'dia av 
science to people who have to work, but want to get 
saians ta pi:pi hu: hcev ta wa:k, bat wont ta get 
more education. Really, I’m rather proud of c us’ 
mo:r edju:'keifan. riali, aim ra:da praud av c AS y 
English.” “Listen to those four men playing cards at 
iyglif ” “lisn ta douz fo: men pleiiy ka:dz at 
the next table! I’m afraid you won’t feel so proud 
da nekst teibl! aim a'freid ju: wount fi:l sou praud 
of ‘us’ English when you hear their stories,” Hardy 
av c AS y iyglif hwen ju: hia dea sto:riz,” ha:di 
said, when they were having supper that evening. “One 
sed, hwen dei wo: hceviy SApa dcet i:vniy. “wau 
of them seems to be the village policeman. They have 
av dam si:mz ta bi: da vilid 3 pa'li:sman. dei hav 
been talking of nothing but fights and blood and crime 
bi:n to:kiy av nApiy bat faits an blAd an kraim 
card 
709 
Chapter Fifty-Nine (59). 
since they came, things that have taken place in this 
sins dei keim, piyz dat hav teikn pleis in dis 
little village. Their cards, too, are just as dirty as 
litl vilidfr ded ka:dz, tu:, a: d$Ast dz da:ti dz 
their stories. I shouldn’t like to touch them Look at 
dea sto.riz. ai judnt laik td tAtj ddm. luk dt 
Marion! She has been listening, too; she’s quite pale.” 
marian! Ji: hdz bi:n lisniy, tu:; fi:z kwait peil” 
“How are you feeling? Anything wrong?” Storm asked 
“hau a: ju: fi:liy? enipiy ray?” sto:m a:skt 
her. “I do feel a little sick,” she replied. “It must 
ha:. “ai du: fi:l d litl sik ” ji: ri'plaid. “it mast 
be because I’m tired, but it was made worse by having 
bi: bi'kaz aim taiad, bat it waz meid wa:s bai haviy 
to listen to that man telling all those stories. If there’s 
ta lisn ta dat man teliy o:l douz sta:riz. if daz 
time before our train leaves, I think I’ll go and lie 
taim bi'fa:r aua trein li:vz, ai piyk ail gou an lai 
down a bit.” She left the table rather suddenly and 
daun a bit” ji: left da teibl ra:da SAdnli and 
ran upstairs. The waitress had seen what had happened, 
ran Ap'steaz. da weitris had si:n hwat had hapnd, 
however, and a moment later, she was standing at the 
hau'eva, and a moumant leita, fi: waz standiy at da 
fat policeman’s table. “You’re a fine one, you are! 
fat paHi'.smanz teibl . “juar a fain WAn, ju: a:! 
See what you’ve done now. You’ve made that poor 
si: hwot ju:v d\n nau. ju:v meid dat pua 
710 
The Fifty-Ninth (59th) Chapter. 
young lady sick with all your stories. And when the 
]\yj leidi sik wid a:l ja: sta:riz. an hwen da 
truth is told, you’re no more use to us than that dusty dusty = grey with 
tru:p iz tould, jua nou mo: ju:s tu as dan dcet dASti ^ ust 
old eagle up there on the wall. I’m sure you’ve never 
ould i:gl a p dear an da wad. aim jua ju:v neva 
been within five miles of a real crime!” 
bi:n wid 1 in faiv mailz av a rial kraim!” 
Marion couldn’t help laughing when they told her about 
mcerian kudnt help la:fir} hwen dei tould ha:r a'baut 
it. In fact, she felt better after hearing that the poor 
it. in fcekt, ji: felt betar a:fta hiariy dat da pua 
policeman had left the place with the waitress pouring 
pa'li:sman had left da pleis wid da weitris pa:riy 
truths into his burning ears. “I’m still proud of ‘us’ 
tru:dz inta hiz ba:niy iaz. (( aim stil praud av ‘as* 
English,” Storm said, when they were sitting in the 
irjglif” sta:m sed, hwen dei wa: sitiy in da 
train. “That was a brave little woman; it’s a serious 
trein. “dcet waz a breiv litl wuman; its a siarias 
matter to speak like that to the law.” “She’s quite 
mceta ta spi:k laik dcet ta da la:.” “fi:z kwait 
safe, old man,” Marshall told him laughing. “She’s 
seif, ould mcen,” ma:fal tould him la:fiy. “fi:z 
his wife!” 
hiz waif!” 
711 
Chapter Fifty-Nine (59). 
EXERCISE A. 
WORDS: 
arrange 
sick 
plain 
digestion 
tight 
dream 
dream (verb) 
dreamt 
healthy 
oil 
circle 
semi-circle 
electric 
card 
post-card 
chief 
afterwards 
argument 
waste 
curtain 
touch 
direct 
charge (verb) 
group 
art 
science 
rock 
eagle 
horn 
village 
drain 
disease 
fever 
typhoid 
712 
Marion and her friends took Storm to hear English 
university people speak about different subjects of — 
and art. —, the young people would go either to Mar¬ 
shall’s or Marion’s home and have long — about what 
they had heard, while they had their tea or sat in a 
— in front of the fire. On these nights, they would 
draw the — and put out the — light, so that the room 
was dark except for the light — by the fire-place and 
a small —. Sometimes they sat — in thought, — about 
the future. “Knowledge,” said Mr. Edwards, “is the 
— upon which young people should build their —,” but 
Mrs. Edwards thought that it Was not — for a young 
girl to take her studies so seriously that she even began 
to find eating a — of time. However, she was glad 
that Marion was discovering that the world was a place 
full of — facts. On a week-end trip into the country 
the young people stayed the night at a — about 20 miles 
from London. Marion was afraid of some cows on ac¬ 
count of their big —. 
In former times people had no — to take the dirty 
water away from the houses. Many people died of 
—, a consequence of living in dirty houses. In the East 
you may get — fever if you drink water that has not 
been boiled. Marion’s father had a friend who got — 
when he was in India. New shoes are sometimes too 
— to be comfortable to walk in. 
It is not good for your stomach and — to eat and drink 
too much. The waitress brought a bottle of — for 
Ellen’s feet. While they were having supper, the young 
The Fifty-Ninth (59th) Chapter. 
people listened to the conversation of four men who 
were playing —. They were talking of nothing but 
fights and blood and —. Marion got — while listening 
to their stories. 
EXERCISE B. 
In chapter 56, Exercise D, you found a letter from Storm 
to Wood. Please answer this letter as if you were Wood. 
In doing so you must use all the words in the following 
list in some way or other: 
marry — daughter — happy — winter — snow — ice 
— skate — break — leg — hospital — doctor — move 
— house — flat — address. 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
A form of the verb which is used very much in Eng¬ 
lish is the first participle. It is made by adding -ing 
to the infinitive. For instance, calling (call-ing) going 
(go-ing), explaining (explain-ing). 
In writing, the following rules must be remembered 
when making the first participle. 
If the infinitive ends in an -e following a consonant, 
this -e is dropped before -ing is added. For instance, 
come — coming, love — loving, but: see — seeing. 
Verbs that end in -ie change the -ie into -y before -ing 
is added. For instance, die — dying, lie — lying. 
When the verb ends in a single consonant, we have to 
follow the rules that were given regarding the past 
malaria 
crime 
set 
consequence 
boil 
skin 
fix 
713 
Chapter Fifty-Nine (59). 
tense, that is: The consonant always remains single when 
following two vowels. For instance, explain-ing. The 
consonant remains single after an unstressed vowel, but 
is made double after a stressed vowel. For instance, 
answer-ing, prefer-ring. To this rule there is, however, 
the exception that -1 is made double even after an 
unstressed vowel. For instance, travel-ling. 
The first participle is used in several ways in English. 
It may be used as an adjective. Examples: I looked 
up into his smiling face. The mother kissed her sleep¬ 
ing child. He told me an interesting story. 
Here is another use of the first participle: He speaks 
French, he is speaking French. Both sentences are in 
the present tense. What do they mean? ‘He speaks 
French’ means that ‘he’ is able to speak French, and 
possibly does so now and then; but ‘he is speaking 
French’ means that ‘he’ is speaking French now. 
Here are some more examples with the same difference 
in meaning: He reads many books — he is reading an 
interesting book. He smokes cigarettes — he is smoking 
a cigarette. These forms of the verbs, ‘is speaking’, ‘is 
reading’, ‘is smoking’, we call expanded [iks'pcendid] 
forms, which means forms that are made longer, and 
you will see that they are made up of a form of ‘to be’ 
and the first participle. 
We may also have expanded forms in all the other 
tenses you have learned, and there is just the same 
sort of difference in meaning between the short forms 
and the expanded forms. Examples: I closed my book 
714 
The Fifty-Ninth (59th) Chapter. 
when he entered the room — I was just closing my 
book when the clock struck twelve. My brother has 
already written one book — he has been writing an¬ 
other one for ten months now. He had written half 
of his first book, before I even knew he had started — 
he had been writing all day on the new book when I 
saw him. 
Sometimes the expanded forms of verbs such as ‘go 5 
and ‘leave 5 express the future. Examples: I am going 
to town to-morrow = I shall go to town to-morrow. I 
am leaving Paris next month = I shall leave Paris 
next month. 
The first participle is used after many verbs, such as 
come, go, sit, lie, see, hear, etc. Examples: He came 
running towards us. She went singing through the 
house. I saw him turning round the corner of the 
street. 
In many cases the first participle is used instead of 
some part of the sentence with the verb in the present 
tense or the past tense. Examples: So saying he closed 
his book = he said so and closed his book. Having 
finished his dinner, he usually smokes a cigar = when 
he has finished his dinner, he usually smokes a cigar. 
Questions: 
How is the first participle made? ... Write the first 
participle form of ‘to die 5 . ... Write the first participle 
form of ‘to stop 5 . ... What are the expanded forms of 
the verbs in the following sentences: He ate an apple. 
We play football? ... 
715 
Chapter Sixty (60). 
The Sixtieth (60th) Chapter. 
What is on your 
mind? = what are 
you thinking of? 
A ‘HAPPY END’ 
“What’s on your mind, mother?” Marion asked her 
“hwots on jo: maind, niAda?” marian a:skt ho: 
mother. “You have been looking for some time as 
mAdo. “ju: hov bi:n lukiy fa s\m taim az 
if you wanted to say something.” It was just after 
if ju: wontid ta sei SAmpiy 33 it waz d$Ast a:fta 
lunch on a quiet Sunday afternoon shortly after New 
IahJ on a kwaiat SAndi a:fta'nu:n fo:tli a:fta nju: 
Year’s Day, and the Edwardses and Storm were 
jiaz dei, and di edwadziz and sto:m wa: 
gathered in front of the fire. “You see,” Mrs. Edwards 
gcedad in frAnt av da faia. “ju: si:/ 3 misiz edwadz 
replied, “Mildred rang up this morning and asked if 
ri'plaid, “mildrid ray a p dis mo.niy and a:skt if 
we couldn’t take Elizabeth off her hands this afternoon. 
wi: kudnt teik i'lizabap o:f ha: handz dis a:fta'nu:n. 
Elizabeth is my sister’s twelve-year-old daughter,” she 
i'lizabap iz mai sistaz twelvjiarould do:ta/ 3 ji: 
explained to Storm. “Father wasn’t here when she 
iks'pleind ta sto:m. “fa: da woznt hia hwen fi: 
rang up, and I didn’t know whether he had any plans 
rcey Ap, and ai didnt nou hweda hi: had eni planz 
for this afternoon, so I promised to tell her after lunch.” 
fa dis a:fta'nu:n, sou ai promist ta tel ha:r a:fta /aw/.” 
716 
The Sixtieth (60th) Chapter. 
“Well, have you made up your mind about it?” Marion 
“wel, hov ju: meid a p jo: maind o'baut it?” mccrion 
make up one’s 
mind = come to a 
decision 
asked. “No, I haven’t. I really ought to let her come, 
a:skt. “nou, ai hcevnt. ai ridli o:t to let ho: k\m, 
I suppose, since we have nothing else on. But Fm 
ai so'pouz, sins wi: hdv n\piy els on. hot aim 
feeling somewhat tired and was looking forward to 
fi:litj SAmhwot taidd on woz lukitj fo:vudd tu 
somewhat = 
a little 
a nice, peaceful Sunday.” She pointed to the small 
d nais, pi:sful SAndi.” Ji: point id ta da snu:l 
peaceful — full of 
peace 
table beside her chair. “You see, I had already gathered 
tcibl hi'said ho: tjeo. “ju: siai hod o:Vredi gcedod 
together on the table the papers and books that I 
to'gedor on do teibl do peipoz on buks dot ai 
needle and 
hcS 
haven’t had time to read till now, — and needles and 
hcevnt hdd taim to ri:d til nan, — on ni:dlz on 
X 
thread and my scissors for a bit of sewing. But with 
pred on mai sizoz for o bit ov souirj. bot wid 
thread 
a child of twelve in the house there will be no peace 
o tfaild ov twelv in do haus deo wil hi: nou pi:s 
for doing all that. 
fo du:iy o:l dcct. 
°6 
“When she was younger, I could give her a pair of 
“hzven ji: woz j^ygo, ai kod giv ho:r o peor ov 
scissors 
scissors and let her cut paper dolls. But she’s too old 
sizoz on let ho: k\t peipo dolz. bot ji:z tu: ould 
for that now, and she’s no good with a needle and 
fo dcet nau , on fi:z non gud wid o ni:dl 
717 
Chapter Sixty (60). 
dangerous = 
of danger 
beast — wild 
animal 
thread, so I dare not let her help me. I can’t make up 
pred, sou ai deo not let ho: help mi:, ai ka:nt meik a p 
my mind what to say to Mildred. If I say ‘No’, Mildred 
mai maind hzvot to sei to mildrid. if ai sei c nou 9 , mildrid 
will have to change her plans; if I say ‘Yes’, I’ll get no 
wil hcev to tfeind 3 ho: plcenz; if ai sei c jes y , ail get nou 
rest to-day.” “Marion and I might take her some- 
rest to'del” “mcerion ond ai mait teik ho: s\m- 
where,” Storm suggested, “to the Zoo, for instance.” 
hzveo” storm so'dystid, “to do zu:, for instons.” 
“That certainly would be nice for us, if you think you 
“dcet so:tnli zvod hi: nais for as, if jit: piyk ju: 
can stand it. I’ll ring up Mildred, then, and tell her.” 
kon stcend it. ail riy \p mildrid , den , on tel ho:.” 
full 
“You would think we were talking about a dangerous 
“ju: zvod piyk zvi: zvo: to:kiy o'baut 0 deind^ros 
animal and not a girl of twelve, to hear your mother 
cenimol on not 0 go:l ov tzvclv, to hio jo: m\do 
speak,” he said to Marion. “She’s almost as dangerous 
spi:k” hi: sed to mcerion. “fi:z o.lmoust oz deind^ros 
to have about as a wild beast,” Marion answered. “She 
to hcev o'baut oz o zvaild bi:st” mcerion a:nsod. “fi: 
says and does whatever comes into her mind without 
sez on dAZ hzvot'evo kAinz into ho: maind zvid'aut 
thinking first, and she doesn’t walk like normal human 
piykiy fo:st, on fi: dAznt zvo:k laik no:mol hju:mon 
beings, but moves about by jumping like a monkey. 
bi:iyz, bot mir.Z'Z o'baut bai d^Ainpiy laik 0 niAyki. 
718 
The Sixtieth (60th) Chapter. 
The last time she was here, she tore a big hole in a 
da la:st taim ji: waz hid, fi: ta:r a big houl in a 
curtain and broke a very fine dish — a gift to my 
ka.tn an brouk a veri fain dij — a gift ta mai 
mother from her uncle in India.” 
m\da fram ha:r \rjkl in indja” 
“The Zoo seems to be the right place for her, then,” 
“da zu: si:mz ta bi: da rait pleis fa: ha:, den ” 
Storm laughed. “I can almost guess what she’s like. 
sta:m la:ft. “ai kan a.lmoust ges hwat ji:z laik. 
My own sister was the same at that age; one of her 
mai oun sista waz da seim at dcet eid 3 ; w\n av ha: 
greatest delights was to sit on a branch above the 
greitist di'laits waz ta sit an a bra:nf a'bAV da 
garden gate and throw things at me when I came home 
ga:dn geit an prou pitjz cet mi: hwen ai keim houm 
from work. Once she threw a paper-bag full of flour 
fram wa:k. WAns fi: pru: a peipabceg ful av flaua 
down on me. She didn’t do that again, though.” 
dann an mi:, fi: didnt du: dcet a'gein, dou ” 
“I can guess what you did to her. And I can fancy 
“ai kan ges hivat ju: did tu ha:. and ai kan fcensi 
what you must have looked like,” Marion said, and 
hwat ju: mAst hav lukt laik” mcerian sed, and 
smiled at the thought. “The little beast wouldn’t 
smaild at da pa:t. “da litl bi:st wudnt 
come down, of course,” Storm went on, “when she 
kAin daun, av ka:s” sta:m went an, “hwen fi: 
He tears, he tore, 
he has torn 
\teaz, ta:, ta:n]. 
gift = present 
delight = great 
pleasure 
719 
Chapter Sixty (60). 
saw how angry I was, so I had to go up myself and 
so: hau ceygri ai woz, sou ai heed ta gou Ap mai'self an 
fetch = get 
fetch her down. It was a delight to seize her by 
fetj ha: daun. it was a di'lait ta si:z ha: bai 
the neck and pull her down, I can tell you. If my 
da nek an pul ha: daun, ai kan tel juif mai 
mother hadn’t come out in time to save her, it’s quite 
m\da hcednt k\m out in taim ta seiv ha:, its kwait 
probable that I should have given her a good beating. 
probabl dat ai fad hav givn ha:r a gud bi:tiy. 
As it was, she was quick to seize the chance of getting 
az it woz, fi: waz kwik ta si:z da tja:ns av getiy 
away from me.” 
a'wei fram mi:” 
“Would you really beat a woman?” Marion interrupted. 
“wad ju: riali bi:t a wunianf” meerian inta'rAptid. 
“Woman!” Storm cried. “Didn’t you tell me yourself 
“ wuman!” storm kraid. ({ didnt ju: tel mi: jo:'self 
a moment ago that girls at that age can hardly be 
o moumant a'gou dat ga:lz at deet eid$ kan ha:dli bi: 
regarded as human beings, but are much more like 
ri'ga:did az hju:man bi:iyz, bat a: mAtf mo: laik 
wild animals?” “All right, all right — it was only 
waild cenimalz?” “o:l rait, o:l rait — it waz ounli 
in fun.” 
in fAn” 
“I’ve always wondered what my mother said to my 
“aiv o:lzvaz zvxndad hzvot mai niAda sed ta mai 
720 
The Sixtieth (60th) Chapter. 
sister that day to break the proud fighting spirit of 
sistd dcet dei ta breik da praud faith] spirit av 
the little savage,” Storm said, as they were on their 
da litl scevid^” sta:m sed, az dei zoa:r an dea 
way to Marion’s aunt. “For next day she brought 
wei ta mcerianz a: fit. “fa nekst dei ji: bro:t 
me gifts as a sign that peace had been established 
mi: gifts az a sain dat pi:s had bi:n is'tceblift 
once more and that the spirit of sisterly love was 
zvahs mo: an dat da spirit av sistali L\v waz 
going to govern all her acts from that time on — a 
gouhj ta gxvan o:l ha:r cekts fram dcet taim on — a 
cigar and a green-and-red tie.” “She probably made 
si'ga:r and a 1 gri:nan'red tai” “fi: probabli nieid 
her see that even brothers are a sort of human 
ha: si: dat i:van br\daz a:r a so:t av Jiju:man 
beings,” Marion replied. At the house of Marion’s 
bi:iyz” mcerian ri'plaid. at da haus av mcerianz 
aunt they found Elizabeth jumping about with joy 
a:nt dei faund i'lizabap dympiy a'baut void dyi 
joy = delight 
at the thought of going to the Zoo with Storm and 
at da po:t av gouirj ta da zu: void sto:rn and 
Marion. “It’s no secret,” Marion’s aunt told her, “that 
mcerian. “its non si:krit” mcerianz o:nt tould ha:, “dat 
Elizabeth gets no more fun out of her visits to your 
i'lizabap gets non mo: f\n out av ha: vizits ta jo: 
parents’ house than your mother does, so you can 
pearants haus dan jo: m\do d.\z, sou jit: ban 
721 
Chapter Sixty (60). 
fancy her joy when she heard where she’s going. It’s 
fcensi ha: dyi hwen Ji: ha:d hwea fi:z gouiy. its 
not far from tears to smiles at that age. — Please 
not fa: from tidz ta smailz at dcet eid$. — pli:z 
fetch Elizabeth’s woollen cap with the feather,” she said 
fetf i'lizabaps wulin keep wid da fed a/ 3 ji: sed 
to a servant who had just entered the room. 
tn a sa:vant hu: had dyst entad da ru:m. 
“I want to show you, Marion, the cap she has been 
“ai wont ta jou ju:, mcerian, da keep fi: haz bi:n 
sewing at school this winter. I really think she’s be- 
souiy at sku:l dis winta. ai riali piyk fi:z bi- 
coming somewhat better at needlework now. I didn’t 
'kAiniy SAinhwot betar at ni:dlwa:k nau. ai didnt 
know she was making it — she had kept it a great 
non fi: waz meikiy it — fi: had kept it a greit 
secret.” 
si'.krit” 
“Here it is — nice, isn’t it?” she asked when the maid 
“hiar it iz — nais, iznt it?” fi: a:skt hwen da meid 
had brought it. “She has made all of it herself, except 
had bro:t it. “fi: haz meid o:l av it ha f self, ik'sept 
the feather, which she pulled from the tail of our 
da feda, hwitf fi: puld fram da ieil av aua 
neighbour’s Christmas turkey — to my husband’s great 
neibaz krisnias ta:ki — ta mai hAzbandz greit 
delight. He doesn’t like our neighbour,” she explained, 
di'lait. hi: dAznt laik aua neiba” fi: iks'pleind f 
feather 
servants = men or 
women working in 
their master's 
house 
722 
The Sixtieth (60th) Chapter. 
while Elizabeth was putting on the cap. “Well, have 
hzvail i'lizabap zuaz putiy on da keep, u wel, heev 
a good time! We shan’t expect you back till half past 
a gud taim! zt'i: ja:nt iks'pekt ju: beck til ha:f pa:st 
five. I’m certainly glad you’re taking her. You see, 
faiv. aim sa:tnli glced jua teikiy ha:. ju: si:, 
both our servants have the afternoon off to-day, and 
boup aua sa.vants hav di 1 a:fta'nu:n a:f ta'dci, an 
we wanted to visit some people where we couldn’t 
zvi: want-id- ta visit sam pi:pl hwea zvi: kudnt 
very well take Elizabeth. Be good, now, Elizabeth!” 
veri wel teik i'lizabap. bi: gud, nan, i'lizabap /” 
“I will, mamma — good-bye!” 
i: ai zvil, ma'ma: — 'gud'bail” 
At the Zoo, most of the animals were not in the open 
at da zu:, inoust av di animals wa: not in di oupan 
air, but had gone inside, as it was rather cold. They 
ra, bat had gan in'said, as it was ra:da kould. dci 
entered one of the buildings, and as they stopped in 
entad w\n av da bildiyz, and az dci stapt in 
front of a very large lion, Storm threw out his arm 
fr.vnt av a veri la:d 3 laian, sta:rn pm: out his a:m 
towards it, bowed low, and said to the two girls, “His 
ta'wa:dz it, baud lou, and sed ta da tu: ga:lz, "his 
Majesty the Lion, King of All Animals.” 
niccd^isti da laian, kiy av a:l animals 
Elizabeth laughed with delight at this idea, but Marion 
i'lizabap la:ft zvid di'lait at dis ai'dia, hat nucrian 
to be in the open 
air = not to be in 
a building of any 
kind 
723 
Chapter Sixty (60). 
said, “His Majesty doesn’t look as if he’s enjoying life 
sed. “hiz mcedysti dAznt luk dz if hi:z in'd^any laif 
very much. In fact, he looks so sad to be locked up 
veri mAtf. in fcekt, hi: Inks sou seed td bi: hkt Ap 
claws 
in here that I almost fancy I can see tears in his 
in hi3 dat ai o:lmoust feensi ai kdn si: tiaz in hiz 
eyes.” “Why, animals can’t cry, can they?” Elizabeth 
aiz. 33 “hwai, cenimalz ka:nt krai, keen deif 33 i'lizabap 
asked Storm. “No, of course not,” he answered seriously. 
a:skt sto:m. “nou, av ko:s not,” hi: a:nsad siariasli. 
“His Majesty has a cold, so his eyes and his nose are 
“hiz meedysti haz a kould, sou hiz aiz an hiz nouz a: 
running, I think.” “Oh, you’re just making fun of 
rAnifj, ai pirjk . 33 “ ou , jua d$Ast meikiy f.\n av 
me,” the child cried. 
mi:l 3 da tfaild kraid. 
“Look at the sharp claws he has,” Marion said. “He 
“luk at da ja:p kh:z hi: heez,” mcerian sed. “hi: 
could tear a man to pieces in no time with those claws.” 
kad tear a mcen ta pi:siz in nou taim wid douz kh:z” 
“You’ll be able to watch him use his claws and his 
“ju:l bi: eibl ta wotj him ju:z hiz kh:z an hiz 
teeth as well,” Storm told her and pointed to a man 
ti:p az well 3 sta:m tould ha: and paintid tu a mcen 
who had entered the house, carrying a big basket of 
hu: had entad da haus, kceriiy a big ba:skit av 
food for the animals. 
fu:d fa di cenimalz. 
724 
The Sixtieth (60th) Chapter. 
Their lion got a large bone with lots of meat on it 
dea laidn got a la:d$ boun wid lots av mi:t on it 
and at once seized it with his claws and began to 
and at wxns si: 2 d it wid hiz kh:z and bi'gcen ta 
tear the meat from the bone with his teeth. In five 
tea da mi:t fram da boun wid hiz ti:p. in faiv 
minutes he had finished it — meat, bone, and all. 
minits hi: had finijt it — mi:t, boun, and o:l. 
Then the big beast rolled peacefully over on one side 
den da big bi:st rould pi:sfuli ouvar on w\n said 
and lay looking out at the four human beings who 
and lei lukiy aut at da fo: hju:man bi:iijz hu: 
were watching him. “Don’t you think he misses the 
wa: wotfiy him. <c dount ju: piyk hi: misiz da 
company of the other beasts in the forests of Africa 
k.unpani av di \da bi:sts in da forists av cefrika 
— or wherever it is he comes from?” Marion asked 
— 0 : hwsar'evar it iz hi: kxmz from? 33 mccrian a:skt 
the man. “Not he! He wouldn’t know what to do with 
da nuen. <: not hi:! hi: wudnt nou hwot ta du: wid 
himself if he was sent to Africa. He’s too used to 
him'self if hi: waz sent tu cefrika. hi:z tu: ju:st ta 
getting his meals every day without having to hunt, 
getiy hiz mi:lz evri dei wid'aut hceviy ta hxnt, 
and he loves to be with human beings. He’s never so 
an hi: Lwz ta bi: wid hju:man bi:iyz. ht:s neva sou 
happy as when the Zoo is full of people for him to 
hcepi az hwen da zu: iz ful m pi.pl f d um 
725 
Chapter Sixty (60). 
look at. When nobody is here, I have to go in and 
luk at. hwen noubddi iz hid, ai hav td gou in dn 
talk to him sometimes, to keep him happy! No, it isn’t 
to:k id him SAmtaimz, td ki:p him ha pi! nou, it iznt 
probable that he was ever outside Europe; I think he 
prjbdbl ddt hi: wdz evdr autsaid judrdp: ai piyk hi: 
was born in Berlin!” 
wdz bo:n in bd:'lin!” 
The next place they entered was the monkey-house. 
dd nekst pleis dei entdd wdz dd mAtjkihaus. 
Elizabeth had brought a bag of nuts and oranges for 
i'lizdbdp hdd brd'.t d bag dv n\ts dnd orind^iz fa: 
them, and one by one she rolled or threw the fruit and 
ddm, dnd w\n bai w.\n fi: rould a: pm: dd fru:t dnd 
nuts in to them. “Try and make them come up to 
n.xts in tu ddm. “trai dn meik ddm k.\m a p td 
the fence and fetch the nuts themselves,” Marion said. 
dd fens dn fetj dd n\ts ddm'selvz,” maridn sed. 
“But be careful that they don’t bite your fingers; you 
“bdt bi: ke.dfnl ddt dei donnt bait ja: fitjgdz; ju: 
had better put the nuts on the floor just outside the 
hdd bctd put dd n\ts in dd fid: d$Ast out 1 said dd 
fence.” 
fens.” 
“There’s a big one coming up now; let him have an 
i( ddz d big ivau kAiniy Ap nan; let him hav dn 
orange!” Storm said, pointing to a large monkey with 
drind 3 /” std:m sed, pdintiy tu d la:d$ mAyki wid 
726 
The Sixtieth ( 60 th) Chapter. 
a wise expression on his face. “He looks almost 
a waiz iks'prefdti on hiz feis. “hi: luks e.lmoust 
human.” “Yes, he looks just like a teacher we have 
hju:men” “jes, hi: luks d$ASt laik a ti:tfd ivi: hczv 
at school,” Elizabeth cried, “Mr. Ambrose Smalljoy. 
dt sku:l” i'lizebep kraid, “mister cembrouz smo.ldyi. 
Oh, what fun! I know what I’m going to do to-morrow; 
ou, hwat f ah ! ai nou hwat aim gouiy td du: ta'marou; 
I’m going to make a picture of ‘Ambrose’ on the wall 
aim gouitj td meik a piktjar av € cembrouz y an da wa:l 
at school and write: ‘Ambrose — The Almost Human’ 
at sku:l an rait: ‘cembrouz — di e:lmoust hju:men y 
under it. Won’t he be angry!” 
aider it. wount hi: bi: czygri!” 
Storm had to laugh at this, but Marion stopped him 
storm heed te la:f at dis , bat mcerian stapt him 
with a look. “What an idea!” she said to Elizabeth. 
wid a Ink. “hwat an ai'die!” ji: sed tu i'lizabep. 
“I don’t think he’ll be angry, but only sad.” “You 
“a/ dount piyk hi:l bi: ceygri, bat ounli seed” “ju: 
don’t know Ambrose,” that kind-hearted child replied. 
dount nou cembrouz” dcct kaindha:tid tfaild n plaid. 
“He loves a good fight as well as anybody. 
“hi: Iavz a gud fait oz wel az enibadi. 
“What is that monkey over there doing to the other 
“hwat iz deet m.xyki ouva dee du:iy ta di Ada 
one’s head?” she continued, watching a monkey who 
w.utz hed?” ji: kan'tinjir.d, witjiij a mMjki hu: 
727 
Chapter Sixty (60). 
worn 
had put its head on another one’s knees. “It’s hunting 
had put its hed an a'nAda wauz ni:z. “its hAntirj 
for insects in its hair,” Storm replied. “They’re learning 
far insekts in its hea” sto:m ri'plaid. “dea la:niy 
one of the rules of living with others: Help your 
WAn av da ru:lz av livitj mid Adaz: help fa: 
neighbour! If we all did that always, it would be much 
neiba! if mi: a:l did dcet a:lmaz, it wad bi: mAtj 
nicer to live and work. We could learn a thing or two 
naisa ta tiv an wa:k. mi: kad la:n a pitj a tu: 
from some of the insects, the bees, for example, who 
fram sahi av di insekts, da bi:z, far ig'za:mpl, hu: 
all work from morning till night for the benefit of all.” 
d: 1 wa:k fram ma:niy til nait fa da benifit av a:l” 
“I don’t think she’s heard a word of what you’ve been 
“ai dount piyk fi:z he:d a wa:d av hwat ju:v bi:n 
saying,” Marion smiled, when he finished. 
seiiy” mcerian smaild, hwen hi: f ini ft. 
For Elizabeth had been busy feeding the monkeys from 
far i'lizabap had bi:n bizi fi:diy da mAykiz fram 
her bag. “They’ll eat almost anything, won’t they?” 
Jia: bceg. “deil i:t a.lmoust enipiy, mount dei?” 
she asked, turning away from the fence at last. “Nuts 
ji: a:skt, ta:niy a'wei fram da fens at la:st. “nAts 
and oranges and apples and bread, and what they find 
and arindyz and ceplz an bred , an hmat dei faind 
in each other’s hair, and worms —” “Worms?” Marion 
in i. tf Adaz hea, an wa:mz —” “ma:mz? }) mcerian 
728 
The Sixtieth (60th) Chapter. 
cried. “Yes, I tried giving them some worms I had 
kraid. “jes, ai traid givirj dBm sam wa:ms ai had 
brought along in the bag for the birds, and they seemed 
bra:t a'lay in da bceg fa da ba:dz, an dei si:md 
to like them, so I let them have them all,” the child 
ta laik dam, sou ai let dam hcev dam a:l, 33 da tjaild 
answered. “Do you mean to tell me,” Marion asked, 
a:nsad. “du: ju: mi:n ta tel mi:/ 3 mcerian a:skt, 
“that I have been carrying a bag full of worms around 
“dat ai hav bi:n kceriirj a bceg ful av warms a'round- 
for more than an hour? Let’s get out into the fresh air 
fa ma: dan an auaf lets get aut inta da fref ea 
— the thought of it makes me sick!” 
— da pa:t av it meiks mi: sik! 33 
As soon as they got outside, however, Marion felt 
as su:n as dei gat aut'said, hau'eva, mcerian felt 
somewhat better, and as Elizabeth seemed to have 
SAmhwat beta , and as i'lisabap si:md ta hav 
decided not to give them any more shocks, the rest 
di'saidid nat ta giv dam eni ma: faks, da rest 
of the afternoon passed quite peacefully. When they 
av di a:fta'nu:n pa:st kwait pi:sfuli. hwen dei 
had taken Elizabeth home, Storm was in- a great hurry 
had teikn i'lisabap houm, sta:m was in a greit h\ri 
to get back to Marion’s house. “Why all this hurry?” 
ta get bcek ta mcerians haus. {( hwai a:l dis h\ri?” 
Marion asked in some surprise. “We’re going some- 
incerian a:skt in SAin sa'prais. (C wia gouirj saiii 
729 
Chapter Sixty (60). 
where together with your parents, and we have to be 
hwea ta'geda wid jo: peardnts, dn wi: lieev ta bi: 
there at seven o’clock,” he replied, “so there isn’t much 
dear at sevn a'klak” hi: ri plaid, “sou dar iznt m\tj 
time left.” “Where are we going? Tell me about it.” 
taim left” “hwear a: wi: gouiy? tel mi: a'baut it” 
“No, it’s a secret. You’ll see when we get there.” 
“non, its a si:krit. ju:l si: hwen wi: get dea” 
After a quick cup of tea, the four of them left the house, 
a:ftar a kwik k\p av ti:, da fa:r av dam left da halts, 
Marion wondering what her father was up to. Mr. 
mcerian wxndariy hwat ha: fa:da waz a p tu. mistar 
Edwards took them to a quiet street of small houses 
edzvads tuk dam tu a kwaiat stri:t av smo:l hauziz 
surrounded by gardens. He walked up to one of them 
sa'raundid bai ga:dnz. hi: wo:kt a p ta w\n av dam 
and rang the bell, while Mrs. Edwards explained, “This 
and very da bel, hwail misiz edwadz iks'pleind, “dis 
is the house where your father and I lived when we were 
iz da hems hwea ja: fa:dar and ai livd hwen wi: wa: 
first married. We saw in the paper the day before yester- 
fa:st mcerid. wi: sj: in da peipa da dei bi'fa: jesta- 
day that the people who live here are going to move. 
di dat da pi:pl hu: liv hia a: gouiy ta mu:v. 
The house will be empty from March 1st. So we 
da liaus zvil bi: cinti fram ma:tf da fa:st. sou wi: 
decided to ask about the price, and if it wasn’t too 
di'saidid tu a:sk a x baut da prais , and if it waznt tu: 
730 
The Sixtieth (60th) Chapter. 
dear now, to take you along and show it to you.” 
did nau, td teik ju: e'loy dn fou it tu ju:.” 
“Too dear?” Marion asked. “Do you mean for us?” 
“tu: did?” mcerien a:skt. “du: ju: mi:n fdr as?” 
She turned to Storm: “And you haven’t told me any- 
fi: te:nd td storm: “dn ju: hcevnt tould mi: cni- 
thing! Does that mean that —?” “It means that we 
pig! d\s dcet mi:n ddt —?” “it mi:ns dot wi: 
can afford to marry now as soon as you can make up 
kdn e'fo.d td mceri nau dz su:n oz ju: kdn meik a p 
your mind about the date. I got a rise this month, 
jo: niaind e'baut do deit. ai got o raiz dis mAnp, 
and I went out at once and spent it on the ring for 
and ai went aut ot w\ns on spent it on do rig fo: 
you — just to be on the safe side! — I mean if you 
ju: — d^Ast to hi: on do seif said! — ai mi:n if ju: 
should decide that you wanted to be married to-morrow, 
fed di'said dot ju: wontid to bi: mcerid to'morou, 
there would hardly be any time at the last minute 
dee wed ha:dli bi: eni taim et do la:st minit 
for buying a ring. But now I’m prepared for the worst!” 
fd baiig e rig. bet nau aim pri'peed fe do we:st!” 
Marion laughed at this. “May I see the ring now?” 
nicer ion la: ft ot dis. “mei ai si: do rig nau?” 
she asked. “And try it on?” At this moment, however, 
//: a:skt. “on trai it on?” ot dis moumont, hau'evd, 
the door was opened by a friendly young man. My 
da do: wez oupend bai o frendli j\g man. 
731 
Chapter Sixty (60). 
He lights, he lit, he 
has lit [laits, lit, lit]. 
kitchen - 
range 
wife is out,” he said, “but I can show you the house.” 
waif iz aut” hi: sed, “bat ai kan fou ju: da haus.” 
There were two rooms and a kitchen downstairs, and 
dea wa: tu: ru:mz and a kit fin 1 daun'steaz, and 
two rooms and a bathroom upstairs. Marion hurried 
tu: ru:mz and a ba:prum 'Ap'steaz. mcBrian hArid 
from room to room, crying, “Isn’t this nice — isn’t that 
fram ru:m ta ru:m, kraiifj, “iznt dis nais — iznt dcet 
lovely!” at every new thing she discovered. “And to 
IavIi'!” at evri nju:. piy fi: dis'kAvad. “an ta 
think that I was born in this house! How strange!” 
piyk dat ai waz ba:n in dis haus! hau streind^!” 
“Yes, isn’t it,” her mother answered. “But come into 
“ jes, iznt it,” ha: mAdar a:nsad. “bat kAm inta 
the kitchen, dear; I want to see what it looks like now. 
da kit fin, dia; ai want ta si: hwat it luks laik nau. 
— It looks almost the same,” she continued, looking 
— it luks a:lmoust da seim,” fi: kan'tinju:d, lukirj 
about her. “The only difference is that it’s no longer 
a'baut ha:. “di ounli difrans iz dat its nou htjga 
lit by gas. They have electric light now.” 
lit bai gees. dei hav ilektrik lait nau” 
To the right was the kitchen-range, and just opposite, 
ta da rait waz da kitfinreind 3, and d$Ast apazit, 
at the other side of the kitchen, stood a small table 
at di Ada said av da kit fin, stud a sma:l teibl 
with four chairs round it and flowers in the centre. 
wid fa: tfeaz raund it and flauaz in da senta. 
732 
The Sixtieth (60th) Chapter. 
“We have our meals here,” the young man explained. 
“zvi: hav aud mi:lz hid” dd ]ayj man iks'pleind. 
“It’s easier for my wife. There's gas for cooking, of 
“its i:zid fd max waif. ddz gas fd kukiy, dv 
course, but in winter we always use the kitchen-range. 
ko:s, bdt in wintd wi: o:lwdz ju:z dd kitjinreind 3. 
It burns coal and keeps the kitchen warm all day. 
it bd:nz koul dn ki:ps dd kitfin wj:m o:l dei. 
I light the fire in the morning before my wife gets up, 
ai lait dd faidr in dd moiniy bi'fo: mai waif gets Ap, 
and put the kettle on the fire. So by the time we're 
dn put dd ketl on dd faid. sou bai dd taim wio 
dressed, the kitchen is already nice and warm, and 
drest, dd kitfin iz o:l'redi nais dn wo:m, dn 
kettle 
the water for our tea is boiling.” “That's the right 
dd zvj:td fdr aud ti: iz boiliy ." “dats dd rait 
spirit!” Mrs. Edwards said. “I was never able to make 
spirit!” misiz edwddz sed. “ai wdz nevdr eibl td meik 
my husband get up first.” 
mai hAzbdnd get Ap fd:st 
Beside the kitchen-range was a large gas-oven. “I had 
bi'said dd kitjinreind 3 wdz d la:d$ gasAvn. “ai had 
a gas-oven, too,” Mrs. Edwards said. “I was very proud 
d gasAvn, tu:” misiz edwddz sed. “ai wdz veri praud 
of it, I remember, for most of my friends had no 
av it, ai ri'membd, fd moust dv mai frendz had non 
gas-oven and had to use the oven of the kitchen-range. 
gasAvn dn had td ju:z di Avn dv dd kitjinreind 3. 
oven 
733 
Chapter Sixty (60). 
But one Christmas, when I had a big turkey in my 
bat w\n krismas, hwen ai heed a big ta:ki in mai 
gas-oven, a sudden wind from the open window blew 
gcesAvn, a s\dn wind frdin di oupdn windou blu: 
out the flame. I discovered it a few moments later 
ant dd fleim. ai dis'kAvad it a fju: moumants leitdr 
and went to light it again, of course. But as soon as 
an went td lait it a'gein, av ka:s. bat az sn:n az 
I lit the match, a big flame jumped out of the gas-oven 
ai lit da mcetf, a big fleim d^Ainpt aut av da geesAvn 
at me and burnt some of my hair. For a long time 
eet mi: an ba:nt sahi av mai hea. far a hfj taim 
after, I was afraid to light the gas-oven, and used 
a:fta, ai zvaz a'freid ta lait da geesAvn , an ju:zd 
my old oven in the kitchen-range, just like all my 
mai ould avh in da kitfinreind 3 , d^Ast laik d: 1 mai 
friends. 
frendz. 
“But here I’m just talking and talking,” she interrupted 
“bat hiar aim d^Ast to:kig an ta:kiy” fi: inta'rAptid 
herself, “and we haven’t heard yet how the two of you 
ha:'self, “an wi: heevnt ha:d jet han da ta: av ju: 
like the house.” “I think it looks fine,” Storm said. 
laik da haus” “ai pigk it luks fain” sta:m sed. 
“And I think it’s perfectly lovely,” Marion cried. 
“and ai piyk its pa:fiktli IavU,” meerian kraid. 
“Only I can’t understand how we can possibly afford 
“ounli ai ka:nt xnda'stcrnd hau zvi: kan posabli a'fa:d 
734 
The Sixtieth (60th) Chapter. 
it.” “It’s a cheap house,” the young man told her. 
it . 33 “its a tji:p haus , 33 da j\y merit tould ha:. 
“Probably because it's rather old. But everything is 
“prababli bi'kaz its ra:dar ould. bat evripiy iz 
well kept, so we’ve never felt that the house was old. 
zvel kept, sou wi:v neva felt dat da haus waz ould. 
And we’re only moving because we need more room; 
an wiar ounli mu.viy bi'kaz wi: ni:d mo: ru:m; 
we have two small children, as you saw upstairs.” 
u'i: hav tu: sma:l tfildran, az jit: so: Ap'steaz.” 
“If you’ll promise to light the fire every winter morning 
“if jn .7 pramis ta lait da faia evri winta rna.niy 
and put the kettle on to boil,” Marion said to Storm, 
an put da ketl an ta boil , 33 mccrian sed ta sta:m, 
as they left the house, “I think it would be lovely to 
az dei left da haus, “ai piyk it wad bi: Lwli ta 
start our married life here. And if we were married 
sta:t aua mcerid laif hid. and if wi: zva: mcerid 
in the middle of March, there would be two weeks 
in da midi av ma:tj, dea wad bi: tu: zui:ks 
to have the rooms painted and to hang the curtains 
ta hcev da ru:mz peintid an ta hcrij da ka:tnz 
and everything.” 
and cvripiy . 33 
“I promise,” Storm answered, taking her arm and 
“ai promis / 3 sto:m a:nsad, teikiy ha:r arm and 
showing her what little there was to be seen of the 
jouiy ha: hwat litl dea waz ta bi: si:n az> da 
735 
Chapter Sixty (60). 
do (here) = be 
enough 
WORDS: 
delight 
fetch 
feather 
worm 
insect 
seize 
kettle 
thread 
needle 
scissors 
pair of scissors 
mind 
somewhat 
ring 
secret 
guess 
gift 
garden. ‘Tm glad you’re satisfied. Remember Leith 
ga:dn. “aim glced jua scrtisfaid. ri'memba li:p 
Hill? Of course, it’s not so big as the farm, nor so 
hilf dv ka:s, its not sou big az da fa:m, no: sou 
modern as your parents’ house.” “But it’ll do for us,” 
madan az ja: pear ants haus” “bat itl du: far as,” 
Marion said. And arm in arm they walked back, full 
mcerian sed. and aim in aim dei waikt bak, ful 
of plans for the future which had suddenly drawn 
av plcenz fa da fjuitfa hwitf had SAdnli dram 
so near. 
sou nia. 
EXERCISE A. 
“Have you made up your — to have Elizabeth this 
afternoon?” Marion asked her mother. On a quiet 
Sunday afternoon the Edwardses and Storm were — 
in front of the fire. A — and — are used to sew with. 
A pair of — is used to cut paper and cloth with. 
The lion is a wild —. Elizabeth had — a big hole 
in one of Mrs. Edwards’ — and broken a fine dish, 
which was a — from her uncle in India. 
Storm told Marion that it was his sister’s greatest — 
to sit on a branch and throw things at him. Once she 
threw a — of flour at him. Storm was of the opinion 
that girls at that age can hardly be regarded as-. 
“Please — Elizabeth’s woollen cap with the —,” Eliza¬ 
beth’s mother said to a — who entered the room. Wild 
— have sharp teeth and —. 
736 
The Sixtieth (60th) Chapter. 
It is not far from — to smiles with small children. 
Elizabeth kept it as a great — that she was making 
a cap at school. At the Zoo, Storm pointed towards the 
lion saying, “His — the Lion, King of All Animals.” 
“He looks so sad to be — up here,” Marion said, “that 
I almost — I can see — in his eyes.” The lion got 
a large — with lots of meat on it and at once — it 
with his claws. 
In five minutes the big — had eaten it all up, and then 
he — over on one side to have a rest. Elizabeth had 
brought a bag of — and — for the monkeys. A bee 
is an —. Marion had carried — in her bag without 
knowing it. Storm had got a rise and at once spent 
it on a — for Marion. In the house where Marion’s 
parents had lived when they were younger, the kitchen 
was no longer — by gas; there was — light now. There 
was — for cooking, but in winter the — was used 
instead, and a — was put on, first thing in the morning. 
EXERCISE B. 
Answer these questions with full sentences: 
Have you any brothers or sisters? ... Are they younger 
or older than yourself? ... What is the kitchen of your 
home lit by? ... Do you smoke? ... If you do, what do 
you prefer to smoke? ... How much do you smoke a 
day? ... What time of the year do you like best, and 
why? ... 
EXERCISE C. GRAMMAR. 
The present and past tenses of do are used in sentences 
with ‘not\ In the sentence ‘John likes tea 5 the English 
probable 
spirit 
human 
being 
sisterly 
beside 
fancy 
joy 
beast 
dangerous 
tear 
tore 
torn 
claw 
tear 
opposite 
roll 
nut 
orange 
servant 
oven 
kitchen-range 
gas-oven 
flame 
gas 
light (verb) 
lit 
gather 
Majesty 
bone 
peaceful 
kind-hearted 
friendly 
737 
Chapter Sixty (60). 
cannot add ‘not’ to the verb, but must say: John does 
not like tea. Notice that this sentence is built up 
in the same way as the sentences with ‘can’, ‘may’, 
‘must 5 , ‘shall 5 , ‘will 5 . (I cannot go there. I could not 
go there.) Examples: I do not go there often. I did 
not go there. He did not see me. You do not swim 
very well. We did not get home till it was too late. 
In the same way do, does, and did are used in questions. 
Example: Does John like tea? Again the sentence is 
built up in the same way as sentences with ‘can*, ‘may 5 , 
‘must 5 , ‘shall 5 , ‘will 5 . (Can you go there?) Examples: 
Do you go there very often? Do you live in town? 
Does he go to school? Did the girl visit her aunt? 
Do is not used in questions (or interrogative sentences, 
as they are called) and sentences with ‘not 5 in the 
following cases: 
1. If the sentence contains a form of the verb ‘to be 5 . 
Examples: He is not here. Is he here? (Do is only 
used when ‘be 5 in connection with ‘not 5 contains the 
idea of commanding. Example: Don’t be foolish.) 
2. If the sentence contains one of the verbs ‘shall 5 , 
‘will 5 , ‘can 5 , ‘may 5 , ‘must 5 , ‘ought 5 . Examples: He 
will not help me. Will you help me? (Sometimes 
‘dare 5 and ‘need 5 are used without do in sentences with 
‘not 5 , and in questions. Examples: They dared not 
fight. Dare I ask you how much you paid for the book? 
I need not tell you what happened. Need it be said 
that I kept my promise?) 
3. Do is not as a rule used with ‘have 5 . Examples: 
Have you seen him? I had not seen him. We only 
738 
The Sixtieth (60th) Chapter. 
find do if ‘have’ is the main verb of the sentence. 
Examples: What did you have for dinner? I did not 
have fish for dinner. 
4. In interrogative sentences beginning with an inter¬ 
rogative pronoun that expresses the person or thing 
that is or does something, do is not used. Examples: 
Who said so? What happened? 
Do may also be used to call special attention to the 
action of the verb. Examples: ‘Do help me!’ (instead 
of just ‘Help me!’) As a rule he would not help his 
friends, but he did help me once. 
Questions: 
In what kinds of sentences is ‘do’ used? ... When is 
‘do’ used in sentences with ‘have’? ... In what kinds 
of interrogative sentences do we use ‘do’? ... 
EXERCISE D. 
siksti'eit, nelsn roud, 
wimbldan. 
da naintimp av d^crnjuari. 
dia wild, 
cii was veri glccd ta ri'si:v jo: leta di \da dei; it 
has bi:n a loij toim sins cii herd nju:s fram houm. da 
dei a:fta jo: letar a'raivd, ai ha:d fram mai sista, tu:. 
ai mast a:sk ju: ta bi: keaful, mai dia felou; ai si: 
fram boup jo: letas dat juar in da greitist deind^a! 
its klia dat ju: dount nou hwot o:l dis gouirj aut void a 
priti ga:l mei li:d tu : bi'fo: ju: nou hwot has heepnd 
ju:v a:skt ha: ta merri ju: — an den, dea ju: a:! 
739 
Chapter Sixty (60). 
bat ta bi: siarias far a moumant, aim glad dat ju: 
si:m ta laik i:tf Ada, a.Vdou ai niAst sei dat at karnt 
kzvait Anda'stand jet dat mai litl sista has groun Ap ta 
bi: a pa:sn dat jAy felous kan fa:l in Iav wid. 
mai oun a'feas hav bi:n di'velapiy rcepidli sins mai 
la:st leta. zvia gouiy ta bi: marid an ma:tj da sevn- 
ti:np. ai iks'pekt mai mAdar an sista ta kAin ouva hia, 
and it wad bi: a greit ple^a ta mi: if ju: an braun 
had kAin, tu:. pa'haps ju: kad hcev ja: halidis a:l'redi 
in ma:tf. an misis ma:jal wil let ju: hcev a ru:m at 
dea halts hwail jua hia, sou da trip wount bi: sou 
iks'pensiv as la:st taim. 
ai houp ju: kan kAin — aim a:l'redi lukiy fa:zvad ta 
ja: visit. 
ai zvif ju: a:l da best! 
sta:in 
740 
COPYRIGHT 
UNDER INTERNATIONAL COPYRIGHT CONVENTION 
PRINTED IN SWITZERLAND 